


(formatted for 80-columns)
 
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
:                                                                             :
:                               Beautiful Boot                                :
:                       by MiniAppler and Apple Bandit                        :
:     Copyright [C] 1984 Midwest Pirates Guild (MPG,) all rights forgotten    :
:                                                                             :
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
 
 
For years, many pirates have created the DOSless disk--that is, a disk that has
no DOS on it, so that more space was left on the disk for programs.  The only 
problem with this was, if you wanted to run one of the programs, you had to 
boot up another disk that had DOS on it, then stick in the DOSless disk, and 
then Run/Brun the program you wanted.  Well, forget it.  MiniAppler and Apple
Bandit have come up with a program that will eliminate those problems forever.
The program, Beautiful Boot, sits on track 0, and has its own built-in RWTS
and fastloader program.  When the disk with Beautiful Boot on it is booted up,
the hi-res graphics screen will clear, and a menu with the binary files on the
disk will show up.  The background will have stars floating by, in color.  To
run (Brun) one of the programs, just hit the letter indicated in the menu.  Al-
so, the following control keys will work in the program:
 
          /Return/     ------->     Read another directory from the same drive
          /Spacebar/   ------->     Read another directory from different drive
          /Escape/     ------->     Get out and return to Basic
 
Now, to install the program, just enter the command, "BRUN BEAUTIFUL BOOT".
When it's finished loading, the screen will clear, and a page of instructions
will show up.  Note that if you do not have a lowercase chip, then all that you
will see is garbage on the screen (hence the purpose of this writeup.)  Hit
a key to get to the next screen, and then the question will be asked, "Do you
wish to make a beautiful boot?"  Hit "Y" (for yes,) and then you will get a
little space (2 lines) to make a short message that will be displayed upon a
disk boot.  Type in your message, and hit the /Return/ key when you are fin-
ished with your message.  Then, a message will come up telling you to insert
the target disk in drive 1 and hit any key.  (Note:  make sure that the disk 
that you insert is initialized--the Vtoc will be modified so as to free up the
unused DOS sectors on the disk--this was also done so as to make a little ea-
sier the updating of old DOSless disks to a Beautiful Boot disk.)  The disk
will be updated with Beautiful Boot, and then a last question will appear, ask-
ing if you want to make another disk with Beautiful Boot.  If you want to make
another (which you surely will, although maybe not at this moment,) hit "Y"
(for yes.)  This will bring you back to the first instruction page.
 
If you hit "N" (for no,) then you will be returned to Basic.  To run Beautiful
Boot, just boot up the newly updated disk.  Then, enjoy!  It all fits onto one
track.  Now, isn't that beautiful work?  Now you will want to update all of
your DOSless disks.  But, that's it for us.  You now know how to make up DOS-
less disks with Beautiful Boot on it.
 
-MiniAppler and Apple Bandit
 
: Copyright [C] 1984 Midwest Pirates Guild (MPG,) all rights forgotten :
: Call the best in the Midwest->  The Safehouse /612/ 724-7066 16 megabytes :
 
(> Distributed by better AE lines all over the country <)



