                21 page printout, page 211 to 231
             INGERSOLL, A BIOGRAPHICAL APPRECIATION

                           CHAPTER 17.

                DID HE PRACTISE WHAT HE PREACHED?

     It is, or rather, it ought to be universally recognized, as a
fundamental principle, that a precept or a doctrine is valuable
solely for what it is in itself. Precepts and doctrines in the
realm of logic, of ethics, -- of philosophy in general, -- like
commodities in the realm of commerce, are worth precisely what they
in themselves will bring. They neither gain nor lose, from the
viewpoint of pure reason, because of the morality or the
immorality, the sincerity or the insincerity, of him who professes
or proclaims them. The multiplication table, recited parrot-like by
one who could not correctly apply it in a simple problem, would be
quite as true as if recited by a Descartes or a Newton. The Golden
Rule, repeated by the most abandoned and dissolute of wretches,
would be just as safe a moral guide as if it fell from the lips of
Confucius or of Christ.

     But, unfortunately, the average man is not yet a thoroughly
logical being; and, consequently, he is apt to value the things
that he reads or hears, not at what they themselves are worth, but
at what they themselves are worth, plus or minus the personal worth
of him who professes or proclaims them. Thus is impersonsl
philosophy debited or credited with the personality of the
philosopher; the impersonal message, with the personality of the
man.

     But if mankind is chargeable with illogic in failing to
distinguish philosophy from the philosopher, it is, conversely, to
be credited with judging the philosopher himself, not by his
philosophy alone, but by his philosophy and his conduct together.
It is to be credited with judging, not by theories, but by theories
and acts; not by words, but by words and deeds; not by mentality,
but by mentality and manhood. It demands not only ideals, but a
practical application of ideals. It recognizes, that, while it is
"a great thing to preach philosophy," it is "far greater to live
it." Hence the triteness of the query, "Does he practise what he
preachcs? "If the latter elicits an affirmative answer, mankind
accepts the philosopher concerned; if a negative answer, it rejects
him -- too often his philosophy included.

     Now, we have examined, somewhat at length, the philosophy of
Ingersoll. We have pointed out his ideals. We have ascertained his
views of the most important subjects of daily human interest. We
have studied his "gospel of the fireside," and his "religion of
humanity." We have read his advice concerning the treatment of wife
and child, of the Poor and unfortunate, and of the criminal. And we
have seen, that his ideal was lofty; that his views were
reasonable; that his advice was sound and good. In other words, we
have coucluded that his philosophy was of the highest, the noblest,
and the best.

     But perhaps we have not fully decided as to the philosopher
himself. It is therefore peculiarly fitting that we now ask
concerning Ingersoll the usual question, "Did he practise what he
preached?"


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               211

             INGERSOLL, A BIOGRAPHICAL APPRECIATION

     Those whose knowledge of his personal life has not been
acquired wholly from the incidental references thereto in the
preceding chapters will surely appreciate the sense of delicacy
which any writer must feel in undertaking a reply to the query just
propounded. What, enter unhidden the sacred precincts of the
fireside king! Standing upon this mental threshold, I feel that one
who would take a forward step should wear the white robes of
perfection -- that he should be clad in vestments of devotion
already consecrated at the innermost shrine of the ideal!

     As stated in Chapter 3, Ingersoll was married on February 13,
1862, at Groveland, Tazewell County, Ill., to Miss Eva A. Parker.
He was then twenty-eight years of age.

     Accepting as true the adage, that "all the world loves a
lover," this marriage must have been blessed with far more than the
usual abundance of well-wishes; for it is morally certain, that,
should we begin even before Shakespeare's time, -- with the
earliest predecessors of Romeo and Juliet, -- we should not be able
to find, either in literature or in life, a more perfect example of
mutual devotion than that with which Robert Ingersoll and Eva
Parker enriched the annals of human affection. And, whether we
accept or reject the other adage, or rather, the teleological
notion, that men and women are "made for each other," we must admit
that here were a man and a woman who, in effect at least, had lived
and waited, and would continue to live, for each other. Not only
was theirs a perfect union of hearts: it was a perfect union of
minds -- an ideal blending of love and intellectual sympathies.
For, as stated in the chapter last mentioned, the Parkers, for
generations, had been Freethinkers; and Eva A. Parker was not an
exception in this respect. Unusually endowed with intelligence and
the spirit of humanity and freedom -- "a woman without
superstition," to quote her husband's exact words of her -- she was
to Robert Ingersoll (again quoting his words) "the one of all the
world."

     But kind as was fortune in effecting a union so perfect, so
absolutely ideal, she did not cease her beneficent ministrations;
and two daughters came to enhance and share the joys of the
Ingersoll fireside. They were Eva R., born at Groveland, and Maud
R., born at Peoria. The first and elder became, in 1889, the wife
of Mr. Walston H. Brown, the banker and railroad-builder. But she
did not thereupon pass from the family circle which included her
distingnished father. There was no table of subtraction in the
Ingersollian domestic arithmetic; and so, instead of one's being
taken away by the ofttimes cruel god of marriage, simply another
chair was drawn at the fireside of the Great Agnostic.

     To say of the children of most men, -- of even the children of
most great men, -- that they love and respect and admire their
father, would doubtless do full justice to the facts. Not so of the
daughters of Iugersoll: they did far more. In childhood they loved
him; in youth they adored him; in womanhood they adored and admired
him as the one ideal embodiment of domestic affection and moral and
intellectual grandeur. For, although enjoying in religious matters,
in accordance with the Ingersollian Golden Rule, "every right" that
their parents claimed for themselves, they became, on reaching the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               212

             INGERSOLL, A BIOGRAPHICAL APPRECIATION

age of intellectual discretion and have since steadfasdy remained,
in keeping with their maternal traditions, in full and perfect
accord with the opinions and teachings of their father. "We all
feel," wrote Mrs. Eva R. Ingersoll-Brown, in expression of the
sentiments, not only of herself and sister, but of her mother and,
in fact, the entire household, "that he is doing the greatest and
noblest work of this world."

     It must ever seem useless to postulate what might or might not
have occurred in the life of a given genius but for the one or the
other fact or circumstance. It will seem doubly useless to whomever
accepts the philosophy, that "all that has been possible has
happened." Nevertheless, I cannot pass this point without at least
suggesting the speculation as to what share of the world's
gratitude for the wealth of courage and heroism, of elevating and
ennobling sentiment, and of artistic beauty, with which Ingersoll
dowered mankind, is due to the three (particularly the first of the
three) noble women who completed the circle around 'the holy hearth
of his home.' Had fate decreed that Robert Ingersoll should walk
alone life's hard, uncertain path, he might still have walked the
intellectual giant, the friend of justice, and the fearless
advocate and invincible champion of physical and mental liberty. He
might have carried the torch of reason, the shield of truth; and
the embattled hosts of injnstice, higotry, and superstition,
pierced by the deadly arrows of his logic -- arrows sweetly
poisoned with scorn and satire -- might still have fallen in their
last pangs, or, mortally wounded, have skulked to cover on either
side. He might, and doubtless would, have given to us what is most
intellectual in a score or more of the great productions previously
mentioned; but it seems equally certain, that, had it not been for
the wife, in whom he realized his heart's ideal, and for the wife
and the daughters together, whose affectionate sympathy, constantly
sustaining, moved him now to tender expression, now to lofty
resolve -- for the wife and daughters, who made his domestic life
one long sweet symphony -- the world would have lost its greatest
champion of the fireside, and the greatest prose-poet of our
tongne; that the highest and best in the productions to which I
refer would not have been uttered; and that many others, as
entireties, would not now enrich our literature and our lives. Let
us therefore thank the three women, who, hopeless of the laurel and
the crown, so nobly did their part in sustaining and inspiring him
who will be ardently praised and lovingly remembered till all
language is barren and all hearts are dust.

     Referring now more specifically to the query as to whether
Ingersoll practised the philosophy which he taught, let us first
view him as the center of his household. This, although it
naturally varied in size, was always very large. Besides Ingersoll
himself, it consisted of Mrs. Ingersoll, Miss Ingersoll, Mr. and
Mrs. Walston H. Brown and their children (Eva Ingersoll and Robert
G. Ingersoll), Mrs. Ingersoll's mother (Mrs. Benjamin Weld Parker),
Mr. Clinton Pinckney Farrell, who sustained to Ingersoll the
various relations of private secretary, traveling companion,
publisher, etc., Mrs. Farrell (Mrs. Ingersull's sister), their
daughter (Eva Ingersoll), Miss Sue Sharkey, and others. To this
number are to be added "a small army" of individuals in the several
capacities of tutor, governess, servant, etc.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               213

             INGERSOLL, A BIOGRAPHICAL APPRECIATION

     There is a saying, as trite as it too often true, that no
house is large enough for two families. Yet here was a house which
held not two but four families, four generations, in perfect
harmony and content. Nothing could have induced them to dwell
apart.

     In his home, out of hearing and sight of the world, Robert G.
Ingersoll was absolutely true to his ideal, -- to each and all of
the domestic precepts and doctrines, which, publicly taught and
professed by him, have heen quoted in the preceding chapters. His
honeymoon lasted till death. He sought to make his home a heaven,
and he succeeded. There all the refining, ennobling, and inspiring
influences of past and present, -- of science, philosophy,
sculpture, painting, poetry, and music, -- blended with the
ineffable charm of a great personality to create for a fortunate
few the fairest place of earth. There, at last, was a home where
Shakespeare was the Bible, Burns the hymn-book, and their most
devoted reader a mingling of both. There did the humanitarian,
philosopher, and poet realize his fondest dream. There, at last,
was the real republic, the ideal democracy -- a realm where love
was the only law -- a realm from whose radiant center there fell
upon all a spirit as benign, as halcyon, as joyful as June's most
perfect day.

     Ingersoll's devotion to home was absolute, it being manifested
even to the extent of relieving his wife of the usual household
responsibilities and cares. In this, he was as prolicicut, as
resourceful, as much himself, -- -in short, as supreme, -- as in
the realms of intellect and art.

     Those who are familiar with About Farming un Illinois will
recall that he emphasizes the relation which cooking bears to
civilization: --

     "The inventer of a good soup did more for his race than the
maker of any creed."

     Hence these directions for broiling beefsteak on a stove: --

     "Shut the front damper -- open the back one -- then take off
a griddle. There will then be a draft downwards through this
opening. Put on your steak, using a wire broiler, and not a
particle of smoke will touch it, for the reason that the smoke goes
down. If you try to broil it with the front damber open, the smoke
will rise. For broiling, coal, even soft coal, makes a better fire
than wood."

     Surely a unique deliverance for the author of the many
wondrous words quoted in preceding chapters! And yet he was
speaking from practical experience.

     Nor was his kuowledge of cooking limited to this recipe: he
was adept in the several branches of the culinary art. And when,
during the early years of his married life, the houshold cook
chanced to be absent, as on a Sunday afternoon, Ingersoll did not
feel that he was measuring to his ideal of devotion unless he
sacrificed the delights of the study or of the parlor, and entered 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               214

             INGERSOLL, A BIOGRAPHICAL APPRECIATION

into active operations in the kitchen. The success of these
operations, it is said, was so well attested as markedly to
diminish the reputation of the regular cook.

     His relief of Mrs. Ingersoll from the usual annoyances
incident to the management of servants was equally characteristic.
If, for example, it happened that one of them had been careless or
delinquent, she would be reproved with a kindliness, a gentle
irony, which, revealing to her, without the slightest offense, her
shortcomings, would not only produce the desired effect, but would
leave her with an added sense of gratitude to her genial employer.
However, it was seldom necessary to resort to even this gentle
procedure; for the employees of the Ingersoll household served with
rare faithfulness. And at the time of his death, several negro men
journeyed from Washington to Dobbs' Ferry, that they might look
once more upon the face of him in whose employ, as servants, in
years gone by, they had felt the warmth of genuine human kindness.

     In all the evidence of Ingersoll's domestic devotion, nothing
is more notable than that every possible hour was spent at home.
Once there, he remained until unavoidably called away, when, if
possible, he took with him one or all of his loved ones. If
unaccompanied, he lost no opportunity for speedy return. He
sometimes resorted to very unique means of returning. For example,
during the early years of his forensic career, he was frequently
called from Peoria in connection with cases that required his daily
attention for a considerable period. It often happened, that, by
the time he concluded his legal labors for the day, the last train
for Peoria had departed; and the distance involved would be too
great to cover with the usual conveyance. He would thereupon
telegraph to the railroad authurities for a "light" locomotive, and
return in its cab to Peoria.

     His relations with his children were invariably those of sweet
and affectionate companionship. He was oak and sunshine to the
violets beneath, -- with no shadows, clouds, or rain. His private
practice in this regard tallied exactly with his unique public
advice. His method consisted in seeking and developing goodness, --
not in condemning "badness," -- in the nature of the child. It was
the method of sympathy. He would praise and reward, but he would
not blame nor censure. He recognized that the child's actions have
necessary causes in physical and mental states. Accordingly, if one
of his little children was doing some mischievous act, he would
divert its attention in some kindly way. He would not resort to the
usual method of "Don't! Don't! Stop! -- You mustn't do that!" etc.,
which, as we have seen, he so heartily disliked. He knew better
than to plant, with "mustn't," the seeds of rebellion in the mind
of a child too young to reason. His children never heard him utter
any of these words.

     The reader of the preceding chapter will recall the following:
--
     "I intend to treat my children, that they can come to my grave
and truthfully say: 'He that sleeps here never gave us a moment of
pain. From his lips, now dust, never came to us an unkind word.'" 
  That prophetic declaration could be absolutely fulfilled but for
this circumstance: Ingersoll has no grave. [NOTE: The ashes of 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               215

             INGERSOLL, A BIOGRAPHICAL APPRECIATION

Robert G. Ingersoll has been buried in the Arlington National
Cemetary and there is now (1989) a large stone with his name
engraved on it.] His loved ones would not give back to nature his
sacred form. But his children can stand by the urn that holds his
ashes "and truthfully say" not only what I have just quoted, but
this also: "We never heard our fathcr utter an impatient word, nor
a word that we now regret."

     And even this touching, this unprecedented tribute, in
conjunction with all of similar significance that has preceded it
in this chapter, is wholly inadequate to convey a fitting
impression of the ideal domestic relations here concerned.
Doubtless, therefore, such impression could best be realized, not
in further biographical description, but in the words of the
incomparable husband and father himself. It could best be realized
in those woudrous messages of affection, of adoration, which now
and then, duriug a long period of years, passed from Ingersoll as
an itinerant propagandist, to those who remained behind at 'the
holy hearth of his home.' But to reproduce those messages, -- to
enter, by baring their golden threads, the sacred place of
affection, -- would involve a sacrilege the mere thought of which
it were impossible to entertain. At the same time, to undertake the
impression which I have mtentioned, and to which it almost seems
that the world is entitled, by way of ethical example, would be to
commit, through sheer inadequacy, a sacrilege just as great!
Perhaps a compromise on the middle ground of such meager extracts
as will follow is a pardonable solution.

     It has already been stated, that Ingersoll's relations with
his children were invariably those of sweet and affectionate
companionship. That this is but feebly descriptive of the relations
mentioned, however, is evident in such letters as the one from
which the following fragment is taken: --

     "Words cannot express the feelings I have for you [Eva] and
Maud and mother. You are the Trinity that I adore. All that I am
capable of loving I love you. * * * We will be together in a few
days."

And: --

     "When I think of mother and you and Maud in that house, it
seems as though it would emit light in the darkest night."

     In the spring of 1891, accompanied by his wife and his younger
daughter, Maud, he was on the westward journey of his second trip
of that year to Montana; but an extract from a letter, or
prosepoem, rather, written at St. Paul, on May 16th, to Eva and her
husband, at Dobbs' Ferry-on-Hudson, shows, as characteristically
and charmingly, perhaps, as could any similar extract, that, as
ususl, home and loved ones were not out of his thoughts, nor even
his sight: --

     "We talk about you both most of the time. I think of you as
looking away across the shining river, at the shadowy and billowy
hills, lost in the purple of distance -- of you down in that
garden, where every leaf is the promise of some joy, and where, it 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               216

             INGERSOLL, A BIOGRAPHICAL APPRECIATION

seems to me, that everything will be glad for you -- of you
watching those cows standing beneath the apple-trees, the blossoms
falling at their feet -- and, above all, of you both loving each
other."

     And then, only four days later (having arrived at Butte), the
invariable longing to return: --

     "Another day nearer home. That is the first thought each
morning. It will only be a few more, and then we will sit together
at 'Walston' and watch for the cantaloupes to grow. * * * We will
have a long summer together -- many, many beautiful days."

     On the 23d he writes, from Helena, happy that on the following
morning "we are to turn our faces towards yours." Well on his way,
another of those charming and inimitable prose-poems in the form of
a letter is written at St. Paul, on the 26th: --

     "Here we are in the 'East' again. * * * we are in perfect
health, * * * and feel that we are nearer home. St Paul seems close
to New York -- nearer to Dobbs' Ferry. We had a beautiful journey
from Helena -- no dust -- the plains as green as paradise --
everything lovely, and along the road the larks were singing. We
talk about you both. We say: 'They are eating breakfast.' 'It is
bedtime now at Dobbs' Ferry.' 'they are probably in the garden.'
And so we go on gabbling about the ones we love above all others in
the wide world; and when I lie down at night I can hear Eva say:
'Can you go to sleep?' 'Good night' 'Do you feel well? -- Well,
good night; and the voice sounds as though there were only love in
the world. * * * "

     And then -- the arrival; but that, undescribed by Ingersoll
himself, is better left, by him who would write, to the reverential
fancy of him who reads.

     "How happy I was when the girls were babes!" wrote Ingersoll
to a nephew, on August 9, 1890. "Well, I am happy still. I am now
reaping the harvest of my life. The house is filled with affection,
and we are all really happy. I hope that you will be as joyous at
57 as I am now."

     Another interesting indication that his happiness continued
after his own babes, as such, were replaced by grandchildren is
furnished by a "fragment" which was written on the first
anniversary of Eva Ingersoll-Brown. The fragment also furnishes a
glimpse of the playful, sunny spirit of its author in his home: --

     "One year of perfect health -- of countless smiles -- of
wonder and suprise -- of growing through and love -- was duly
celebrated on this day, and all paid tribute to the infant gueen.
There was whirling things that scattered music as they turned --
and boxes filled with tunes -- and curious animals of whittled wood
-- and ivory rings with tinkling bells -- and little dishes for a
fairy-feast -- horses that rocked, and bleating sheep and monstrous
elephants of painted tin. A baby-tender, for a tender babe,
garments of silk and cushions wrought with flowers and pictures of
her mother when a babe -- and silver dishes for another year -- and


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               217

             INGERSOLL, A BIOGRAPHICAL APPRECIATION

coach and four and train of cars -- and bric-a-brac for baby's
house -- and last of all, a pearl, to mark her first round year of
life and love."

     Quite as interesting, for the same reasons, is the following
letter, written five years later: --

                              "The Arlington,
                         "Hot Springs, Ark., Feb'y 16th 1898.

"Dear Eva and Robbie:

     "We received your sweet letter this morning, and we are glad
to hear that you love us and want us to come home. We will see you
in a few days and tell you where we have been and what we have
seen. We have been over the prairies and bridges, and through the
forests, and in the towns and cities. We have seen thousands of
men, women, and children, and lots of babes; but we have seen no
girl and boy as sweet as you. This is a beautiful day, and Grandma
and I are going to take a walk. The sun is shining, and the sky is
blue as Robbie's eyes and as bright as Eva's smile. We love you
both and would like to hug and kiss you this morning. Kiss mamma
and papa for us, and tell them to be good -- as good as you are,
and that will be good enough. I hope you had good dreams last
night. Hope you have had the cow mended, and that all dolls and
animals are well -- that no legs are broken. As soon as I get back
I will eat some baked apples with you and give you both a lot of
whipped cream. We will have gay times. Give our love to grandmother
Parker, and to Eva Farrell and her mother, and to aunt Maud, and
Judy with her beautiful nose, and to Annie.

     "Well, good-bye. Love and kisses for you both. Your letters
make us happy.

                                             "We love you.

                                             "Grandma and Grandpa."

     The pecuniary features of Ingersoll's domestic philosophy were
carried out in a very characteristic way. One of the drawers of a
particular bureau served as a household bank, the contents of which
were replenished from time to time with odd amounts -- greater or
less, as circumstances might prompt. Without key or accountant,
this unique monetary institution, with one depositor, was equally
accessible to all. Wife and children were simply told by husband
and father, that what was his was theirs. He did this that they
might be free from the necessity of asking for money. He desired
that their pecuniary liberty, so to speak, as well as their liberty
in all other respects, should be absolute. At the same time, as
regards his children, he preferred, for ethical reasons, that they
should not have the actual handling of money -- lest they might
come to care for it in itself. Instead, therefore, of being put to
the necessity of availing themselves of the very liberty which they
so well knew was theirs, namely, the privileges of the "household
bank," they were accompanied to the "shops" and there told to
sclect what they wished.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               218

             INGERSOLL, A BIOGRAPHICAL APPRECIATION

     The ethical result of this method was the very one that their
father had hoped to attan. The children, knowing that they were at
liberty to draw upon the common fund at any time, rarely did so, --
rarely had money in their personal possession, -- and,
consequently, never acquired the mental attitude which tends to
make of money a fetich. Similarly with respect to the things that
money could procure: knuwing that they might have whatever they
chose, they seldom asked for anything, and never for anything
unreasonable. In fact, they were very economical, it being their
constant aim to avoid puttiug any unnecessary burden upon their
noble and generous father. Their solicitude in this regard was also
manifest in the care of things with which they or the household in
common had already been provided. Here again, knowing that if they
chanced to break or mar a doll or a dish or a piece of furniture no
blame would attach, they were unusually careful; and when such an
accident did occur, they felt it even to the keenest sorrow. All
this could only have been due to the ideal relations which they
enjoyed -- to affection, justice, and freedom -- to the restraint
of liberty.

     Very often, at the conclusion of lectures in which Ingersoll
had set forth his doctrine of domestic finance, people would gather
about him and say that they could never treat their children as he
had taught.

     "Why," some man would declare, "my children would rob me --
bankrupt me!"

     "That would be because you had not treated them rightly at the
start," Ingersoll would reply, in effect. "But take your children
aside and have a good honest talk with them. Tell them that you are
going to give them a little liberty, and that if they do not abuse
it, it will continue."

     Sometimes the advice given in the lectures themselves required
no supplemental remarks. To mention a case in point: A Uuited
States senator from one of the Pacific states had disowned his
daughter in his will, because she married contrary to his wishes.
He had not spoken to her for twenty years. It chanced that
Ingersoll visited the senator's place of residence and delivered
The Liberty of Man, Woman, and Child. After hearing the latter, the
aged senator went home and wrote to his daughter. He told her that
he had just heard a lecture which had convinced him that he was "an
old fool." He begged her forgiveness, and asked that she come to
him. But he did not await her arrival: he took a carriage that
night and drove to her home, a long distance, reaching his
destination at some unseemly hour.

     The ennobling effect of the lectnre just mentioned has often
been remarked. It has been said, for instance, that a man on his
way home from hearing it would, if possible, purchase some gift or
other for his family.

     An intimate associate of Ingersoll has stated, that he himself
was never able to sit with the audience during a delivery of the
lecture, without being moved to tears, because he knew that its
every word came straight from the orator's heart, and was lived 
during every moment of his life.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               219

             INGERSOLL, A BIOGRAPHICAL APPRECIATION

     The wife of a certain prominent citizen of Illinois, although
herself a Christian, would never permit a detractor of Ingersoll to
go unrebuked in her presence, because the latter's influence upon
her husband had been so elevating and ennobling.

     The remaining space of this volume might be devoted to similar
cases and incidents. But enough concerning this single phase of
Ingersoll's character. For it is already evident, that the
influence of his teachings and of his great personality, radiating
beyond the ideal circle in which he dwelt, made for the domestic
ideal in the remotest parts of the continent.

     Hardly less notable than his devotion to his family was his
devotion to his friends. His heart, his purse, his house, his great
prestige, his most arduous intellectual endeavors, were freely
theirs. Probably no other man ever had greater capacity for
friendship. To know him was to be his friend forever.

     Innumerable as were his misguided enemies, his personal
friends were legion. And what a miscellaneous assembly they would
have made! They represented nearly every race, every reputable
vocation, every social stage. In official life, they ranged from
president to messenger, from general to private, from admiral to
landsman; in commerce, from the president of the great railway-
system to the clerk; in literature, from the poet to the pennya-
liner. Inventors, jurists, physicians, painters, actors, musicians,
were his friends; and all loved him with woudrous devotion. Each of
them who survives can say, with Mark Twain: "His was a great and
beautiful spirit; he was a man -- all man, from his crown to his
foot-soles. My reverence forhim was deep and genuine. I prized his
affection for me, and returned it with usury."

     Whether in Peoria, in Washington, or in New York, the home of
Ingersoll was an attractive and ever-welcoming center. Indeed, few
were his notable contemporaries who had not experienced the rare
lehghts of an evening there. For it was not, like so many other
luxurions homes, a rendezvous for the mentally commonplace. Its
attractions were for individualities -- for such as have, in all
ages and lands, been accustomed to think and to act. They possessed
little capacity for polite fatuities and the private affairs of
others; and even had they inclined to the latter, they would have
been wasting their precious hours. For their host entertained a
most hearty dislike for social gossip. It was utterly beneath him.
'It is just as easy to be familiar with the history of Julius
Caesar,' he would say, in effect, as to be familiar with the
affairs of your next-door neighbor.' Hence the topics of
conversation were of the most substantial and engaging sort. They
would have interested women like de Stael and George Eliot, and men
like Voltaire, Goethe, Burns, Huxley, Emerson, and Lincoln. How
much they interested men of lesser note is a matter of social
history. Thus in Washington, of a Sundsy evening (always the
"at-home" evening of the Ingersnll), men of national and
international reputation -- prominent members of the House and of
the Senate, members of the Cabinet, etc. -- invariably formed part
of the circle of which the great orator was the magnetic center. 




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               220

             INGERSOLL, A BIOGRAPHICAL APPRECIATION

During "presidential years," it was not unusual to find in the
Ingersoll drawingroom a half-dozen prospective candidates for the 
presidency, absorbed in the discussion of current political
questions.

     Needless to state, that, in the Ingersoll domestic circle,
there was not only the most generous material hospitality: there
was genuine intellectual hospitslity, -- something which, alas, too
rarely prevails in the home. A prominent intellectual man who was
a frequent caller at the Great Agnostic's used to remark, that it
was the only place where he felt free to express his real
convictions on all matters whatsoever. He had found, at last, with
trtie appreciation, a circle in which he not only could express his
honest thoughts without offense to anyone else, but in which he
must express them, if he would enjoy the highest respect of all its
members.

     If we consider the immensity of Ingersoll's personality, his
encyclopedic knowledge, his charm of presence and conversation, we
need not tax the fancy to conceive something of the delights of an
evening at his fireside. There are individuals who would minify
those delights, as far as Ingersoll's conversation is concerned, by
charging that he was not a thinker. The truth is, that he was one
of the profoundest of thinkers. There were few if any suhjects of
human interest on which he had not thought deeply, and on which he
was not preparedinstantly to express an opinion, whether from the
rostrum or from his seat by the hearth. In this he had schooled
himself from youth. But it was his misfortune, that he was neither
solemn in manner nor ambiguous in expression. If he had only been
void of humor, and if his language could only have been
misunderstood, he would have been universally regarded as profound.
Perspicuity, especially if wedded to humor, has ever been the enemy
of philosophic fame.

     Despite the depth and the range of his original thought, he
read the thoughts of others. It was said by Schopenhauer, that if
one wished to become a fool, one should pick up a book at every
spare moment. This advice evidently is not always to be relied on;
for very rarely did Ingersoll pass a leisure hour without a book.

     In this connection should be specially mentioned two features
of his remarkable mentality. The first was the faculty of divining
just where to extract "the pith and marrow" of the matter before
him. Surprising as it would sound to his anti-theological critics,
it is said by those who know best that there seemed to be some sort
of good demon in attendance to guide him forthwith to the most
interesting and profitable parts. He would read a page at a glance
and yet he never appeared to be in a hurry.

     The other feature of mentality to which I have referred was
memory. He never forgot what he read. Mr. Baldwin, editor of the
Peoria Star, is authority for the statement tbat Ingersoll once
repeated from memory, without hesitation or error, and with perfect
elocutionary effect, upwards of thirty separate poems which he had
read, on the same day, for the first time, in the train between
Chicago and Peoria. Mr. Baldwin, unobserved by Ingersoll, held a
copy of the poems during the recitation, which was instigated by a
Mr. Breed, in his drug-store, in Peoria.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               221

             INGERSOLL, A BIOGRAPHICAL APPRECIATION

     Considering the attributes here briefly indicated, it is
hardly surprising that Ingersoll's intimate friends declare, as
their conviction, that 'if his private conversations could have
been preserved, it would have been better to let the writings go.'
"I have been with him on a hundred political platforms," says
Colonel Clark E. Carr. "I have heard him many times in literary
addresses, always thrilled and moved by snch eloquence as could
'haunt the heart, rouse the passions, lull rampant multitudes,
scatter to dust the thrones of kings, and effect more wonders than
the grandest chorus or the deftest pen,' and still it always seemed
to me that Colonel Ingersoll was more sublime in conversation than
anywhere else. As Macaulay says, the life of Dr. Johnson is the
biography of biographies. Splendid as this biography is, and
enchanting as are its pages, it has always seemed to me since I
came to know Colonel Ingersoll well, that if some Boswell could
have been his constant companion to jot down every day the
incidents and what he said in every position and relation of life,
he would be able to give to the world a volume more interesting
than Boswell's Life of Johnson. On several occasions Ingersoll's
stenographic secretaries, evidently sharing this opinion,
endeavored to suit their action thereto, as far as preserving the
conversation was concerned; but they were always prevented from
doing so. His inherent modesty would promptly assert itself, as it
invariably did in matters of personal biography, and he would say:
"I can't allow that," "You will have to stop that." And so, for the
most part, those wondrous words of philosophy, of wit and wisdom,
of humor and pathos, were lost to the world, and will live but a
few brief years in the minds of a fortunate few.

     However, with many other words of like nature, addressed to
frieuds through the medium of writing, it has happily been
different, as the following letters show. They are typical of their
author in the several moods disclosed.

               ON RECEIVING A PRESENT OF A VISIT.

                                   "Peoria, Oct. 21, 1893.
                                        "J.W. Proctor, Esq.

     "Dear Friend: Day before yesterday Messrs, Mawhynter & French,
of this city, handed me an elegant vest, for which, as they
informed me, I was indebted to you.

     "I must say that I think you made a good investment, at least
for me. I thank you for your kindness and hope that you may live
long in the enjoyment of all the vestal virtues of life; that your
vested rights may never be wrested from you, at least without legal
investigation. I also hope that after your death you will not long
be kept in the vestibule of the better world, but be allowed to
enter heaven at once.

     "In conclusion, I am in favor of prosecuting the war until not
a vestige remains of the rebellion.

                                        "Yours truly,

                                             "R.G. Ingersoll.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               222

             INGERSOLL, A BIOGRAPHICAL APPRECIATION

     "Remember me to Dr. McDowell and family." [NOTE: This amusing
play on the word 'vest' was brought about by a Mr. Proctor, then a
resident of Lewistown, Fulton County, Ill., who had prevailed upon
Ingersoll to visit Lewistown and deliver a speech to constrict the
anti-war sentiment which was rife in Fulton County, and had
endeavored to induce the speaker to accept compensation for his
services. Failing in this, Mr. Proctor went to Ingersoll's tailors,
in Peoria, and ordered the vest as a suprise. Dr. McDowell was
Ingersoll's host at Lewistown.]

        DECLINING AN INVITATION TO THE FIRST ANNIVERSARY
            DINNER OF THE CLOVER CLUB, PHILADELPHIA,
                        JANUARY 28, 1883
                 (TO COLONEL THOMAS DONALDSON) 

     "I regret that I cannot be 'in clover' with you on the 28th
instant.

     "A wonderful thing is clover! It means honey and cream, --
that is to say, industry and contentment, -- that is to say, the
happy bees in perfumed fields, and at the cottage gate 'bos' the
bountiful serenely chewing satisfaction's cud, in that blessed
twilight pause that like a benediction falls between all toil and
sleep.

     "This clover makes me dream of happy hours; of childhood's
rosy cheeks; of dimpled babes; of wholesome, loving wives; of
honest men; of springs and brooks and violets and all there is of
stainless joy inpeaceful human life.

     "A wonderful word is 'clover'! drop the 'c,' and you have the
happiest of mankind. Drop the 'r,' and 'c,' and you have left the
only thing that makes a heaven of this dull and barren earth. Drop
the 'r,' and there remains a warm, deceitful bud that sweetens
breath and keeps the peace in countless homes whose master frequent
clubs. After all, Bottom was right:

     "'Good hay, sweet hay, hath no fellow.'
     "Yours sincerely and regretfully.

                                               "R.G. Ingersoll.

                           "Washington, D.C., January 16, 1883."

                ON RECEIVING A PRESENT OF OPALS.

                                        "November 26, 1885.

"My Dear Mr. Johnston:

     "A thousand thanks for your beautiful gift. Had I dreamed of
your doing any such thing, I should never have spoken of the
jewels. Now I can only express my surprise, my thanks, and ask you
and Mrs. Johnston to come and see them and us.

     "Diamonds are cold as intellect; rubies, warm and selfish as
desire; but the ominous opel, with its imprisoned fire, is a 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               223

             INGERSOLL, A BIOGRAPHICAL APPRECIATION

combination of head and heart -- of brain and blood -- a mingling
of purity and passion -- virtue glorified by love.

     "Thanking you again and again, and again, saying Come and see
us,

                                                  "I remain,
                                                  "Yours always,

                                                    R.G. Ingersoll.
     "J.H. Johnston, Esq."

                 ACKNOWLEDGING A GIFT OF CIGARS.

                                   "117 East 21st Street,
                                   "Gramercy Park, April 14, 1899.

"My Dear Major Smith:

     "To-day I opened a box of cigars and found your letter. I read
it and said: 'He certainly was good to me.' I am smoking one now,
and there starts over me a sense of gratitude -- a feeling that I
have a friend -- that I am not forgotten. Let them say what they
will, there is in tobacco the essence, the aroma of friendship. The
'pipe of peace' is not a savage fancy -- it is a civilized and
scientific fact. Tobacco is social. It is a medium of mental
exchange. The doctors may say it shortens life -- but the longer
life is without it, the worse it is. The preachers say that to use
it is wicked. The reason, and the only one they have, for saying
this is that it gives us joy. For my own part, I had rather smoke
one cigar than hear two sermons. In fact I had rather chew 'green
twist' than to read the best chapter in Leviticus.

     "But whether smoke shortins life or not, whether it puts my
soul in peril or not, I send you a thousand thanks for sending me
a box of temptations -- from which my sincere prayse is not to be
delivered. I will smoke and thank you.

                                               "Yours always,

                                                  "R.G. Ingersoll."

              PRESENTING A COPY OF LES MISERABLES.

                                          "New York, Dec. 30, 1885.

"Dear Palmer:

     "I send you the greatest novel in the world -- a novel filled
with philosophy, beauty, pathos -- with all that is tender, heroic,
and dramatic. You will find all the lights and shadows that fall
upon the heart -- all the buds and blossoms, and all the withered
leaves, that belong to Hope and Memory.

     "This novel goes over the whole field of human experience --
war, religion, politics, love, government, crime, punishment,
education, history, and prophecy. It is filled with the divine -- 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               224

             INGERSOLL, A BIOGRAPHICAL APPRECIATION

that is to say, with pity, with love. The good bishop, the sublime
convict, the pure 'sister' Simplice, the purer Fantine -- all these
contradictions, are higher forms of truth.

     "No man can read this book without becoming much better or
much worse. This great light will either illumine the soul, or
deepen the shadow.

     "You will read it with wonder and tears.

     "You will finish it with a sigh.

                                        R.G. Ingersoll."

     In dealing with strangers, as in intercourse with friends,
Ingersoll ever manifested the most admirabletraits. Whether in
contact with high public officials, or with employes of railroads
and hotels, or with members of the press, his manner and
conversation were above criticism. Invariably courteous and
considerate, -- generous at every opportunity for being so, -- he
frequently acted the role of friend.

     Consider his relations with newspaper men. Aside from the
probability that he created for them more work than any other
individual publicist, he was, in his personal dealings, one of the
very best friends, if not the best friend, that the reporters have
ever had. He was the most approachable of men. And not only did he
make the interview socially pleasurable, he made it a practical
success, for the reporter. He possessed the sense of "news" -- knew
just what was wanted, and gave it. This is interestingly evidenced
by the fact that his permanently published interviews alone,
extracted from the press of the United States, Canada, and England,
occupy more than seven hundred octavo pages, and deal with almost
every subject of human concern. He was interviewed on even "the
interviewer." It is said by the reporters themselves, that
Ingersoll was never known to decline an interview, and that many
men who hold high positions in journalism achieved their first
professional success at his hands. Precisely the same could he
stated with reference to members of other professions who, as
strngers, songht his wise and kindly counsel.

     One of the best proofs of moral greatness and mental largeness
is absence of caste and of racial, religious, and political
prejudice. Ingersoll had none of these -- was not prejudiced
against the individual. Take the two worst forms of prejudice, --
racial and religious. With reference to the latter, he said: --

     "Understand me. I hate Methodism, and yet I know hundreds of
splindid Methodists. I hate Catholicism, and like Catholics. I hate
insanity but not the insane."

     He was as generous with the orthodox Catholic, as an
individual, as he was with the dogmatic atheist. As to racial
prejudice: he would have treated a negro evangelist with as much
consideration as he would Professor Huxley. He was graciously
afflicted with the colorblindness of true democracy. Like so many 



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               225

             INGERSOLL, A BIOGRAPHICAL APPRECIATION

other members of the negro race, the late Frederick Douglass has
furnished most interesting evidence of this. On page 560 of his
Life and Times, he says: --

     "A dozen years ago, or more [1868 or earlier], on one of the
frostiest and coldest nights I ever experienced, I delivered a
lecture in the town of Elmwood, Illinois, twenty miles distant from
Peoria. It was one of those bleak and flinty nights, when prairie
winds pierce like needles, and a step on the snow sounds like a
file on the steel teeth of a saw. My next appointment after Elmwood
was on Monday night, and in order to reach it in time, it was
necessary to go to Peora the night previous, so as to take an early
morning train, and I could only accomplish this by leaving Elmwood
after my lecture at midnight, for there was no Sunday train. So a
little before the houre at which my train was expected at Elmwood,
I started for the station with my friend Mr. Brown, the gentleman
who had kindly entertained me during my stay. On the way I said to
him, 'I am going to Peoria with something like real dread of the
place. I expect to be compelled to walk the streets of that city
all night to keep from freezing.' I told him that 'the last time I
was there I could obtain no shelter at any hotel and fear I shall
meet a similar exclusion to-night.' Mr. Brown was visibly affected
by the statement and for some time was silent. At last, as if
discovering a way out of a painful situation, he said, 'I know a
man in Peoria, should the hotels be closed against you there, who
would gladly open his doors to you -- a man who will receive you at
any hour of the night, and in any weather, and that man is Robert
G. Ingersoll.' 'Why,' said I, 'it would not do to disturb a family
at such a time as I shall arrive there, on a night so cold as
this.' 'No matter about the hour,' he said; 'neither he nor his
family would be happy if they thought you were shelterless on such
a night. I know Mr. Ingersoll, and that he will be glad to welcome
you at midnight or at cock-crow.' I became much interested by this
description of Mr. Ingersoll. Fortunately I had no occasion for
disturbing him or his family. I found quarters for the night at the
best hotel in the city. In the morning I resolved to know more of
this now famous and noted 'infidel.' I gave him an early call, for
I was not so abundant in cash as to refuse hospitality in a strange
city when on a mission of 'good will to men.' The experiment worked
admirably. Mr. Ingersoll was at home, and if I have ever met a man
with real living human sunshine in his face, and honest, manly
kindness in his voice, I met one who possessed these qualities that
morning. I received a welcome from Mr. Ingersoll and his family
which would have been a cordial to the bruised heart of any
proscribed and storm-beaten stranger, and one which I can never
forget or fail to appreciate. Perhaps there were Christian
ministers and Christian families in Peoria at that time by whom I
might have been received in the same gracious manner. In charity I
am bound to say there probably were such ministers and such
families, but I am equally bound to say that in my former visits to
this place I had failed to find them."

     Besides this appreciative expression, Mr. Douglas is said to
have stated, that, of all the great men of his personal
acquaintance, there had been only two in whose presence he could be
without feeling that he was regarded as inferior to them -- Abraham
Lincoln and Robert G. Ingersoll.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               226

             INGERSOLL, A BIOGRAPHICAL APPRECIATION

     On the day of the latter's death, a negro waiter at the
Cadillac Hotel, Detroit, having indicated to one of the guests, by
word and manner, that he (the waiter) was feeling "powerful bad,"
the following colloquy took place: --

     "I've lost a good friend to-day. Oh! a very good friend,"
explained the waiter.

     "Indeed," said the guest. "Who was it?"

     "Colonel Ingersoll, sir; Colonel Ingersoll."

     "Was he yonr friend?"

     "He was, indeed, sir; he was my friend, one of the best of
them, sir. He always used me as a gentleman, Colonel Ingersoll did.
He never knew whether my skin was black or white."

     The last sentence could be truthfully uttered by every other
colored man with whom Ingersoll came in contact. Whethcr in
private, or in the rostrum, or on the field of battle, the negro
never had a truer friend.

     In the bestowal of charity, Ingersoll was quite as careless of
race, color, and creed as in the bestowal of friendship. His
beneficence compassed all. This is so widely known, despite the
modesty which he exercised, and so many incidental references to it
were made in previous chapters, that, toanswer here in the
affirmative the query as to whether he practised the charity which
he advocated, seems all but needless. One would think that his
benevolence, inseparably blended as it is with the most cherished
memories of him, would live even if left wholly to tradition.
Certain it is, that the declaration of Hamlet has proven false for
once: --

     " * * * there's hope a great man's memory may outlive his life
half a year; but by'r lady, he must build churches then * * * ."

     Still, it may not be well to place implicit confidence in
tradition.

     It is peculiarly interesting, that the Great Agnostic's
sentiments on the unfortunate had been perfectly expressed for him
in a prayer -- "the best" that he "ever read" -- the prayer of Lear
upon the heath: --

     "Poor naked wretches, wheresoe'er you are,
          That bide the pelting of this pitiless storm,

      How shall your unhoused heads, your unfed sides,
          Your looped and windowed raggedness, defend you

      From seasons such as these? Oh, I have ta'en
          too little care of this. Take physic, pomp;

      Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel,
          That thou may'st shake the superflux to them,
               And show the heavens more just."

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               227

             INGERSOLL, A BIOGRAPHICAL APPRECIATION

     Yet, notwithstanding his admiration for this marvelous
deliverance, he himself declared: --

          "The hands that help are better far
                  Than lips that pray."

     He used to say that he did not understand how one could live
in possession of great wealth where thousands were starving, any
more than one could keep a pile of lumher on the beach and watch
thousands drown in the sea. And he acted in perfect accord with
these sentiments. A gentleman who was intimately scquainted with
Ingersoll's private affairs remarked to the author, while Ingersoll
was yet living: "The world will never know the extent of 'the
Culonel's' benefactions. He will not permit it to be known while he
lives; and after he is dead, no one will be able to believe the
truth about it, even if divulged by his family."

     The sufferings of the poor and wretched filled his heart with
anguish. It was an unwritten law, that no one should go hungry from
his door. It is morally certain, that he never turned a deaf ear to
poverty. It is just as certain, that he was constantly imposed
upon. Some of his friends, feeling sure of this, used to advise him
to mingle more Judgment with his charity. To such he replied: "The
trouble with most people is, that they mingle so much 'judgment'
with their charity that it is nearly all 'judgment.'" And so his
responses to the countless appeals that reached him in various
ways, from all sides, were practically indiscriminate. He said that
he should rather be deceived a dozen times, than that one poor soul
should suffer through mistaken suspicion.

     Though Ingersoll gave his dollars by hundredsand thousands, it
was not the size of his individual gifts that proved most clearly
his beneficent qualities: it was the number and the spirit of those
gifts -- the countless acts which he performed, in private, with
the understandiug that they were not to become generally known, and
which, in fact, did become known to only a few.

     As has so often been observed by his detractors, he founded no
college or asylum. He was too busy with the individual. He never
experienced, nor cared to experience, the haughty, egotistic
satisfaction of one who sees his own name chiseled amid the cold
embellishments of architecture; but a thousand times he heard the
words, or saw the tears, of those who, in need, felt the warmth of
his heart. To assist the ragged, hungry, and despairing wretch of
the street; to make a substantial gift to some man or woman grown
prematurely old with menial toil; to relieve the necessities of
some poor girl, some clerk or student; to care for the mother and
child that death has left with naught but tears; to sympathize with
the failures, -- the victims, -- of nature; to uplift the fallen;
to pity even the criminal and despised -- to do all these, as did
Ingersoll, is to demonstrate, not merely "philanthropy," but the
possession of as tender and noble a heart as ever throbbed in human
breast.

     Even should we decline to ascribe to Ingersoll higher
attributes than are ordinarily implied by "philantltropic," we
should still be bound to inquire, in simple fairness, whether he 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               228

             INGERSOLL, A BIOGRAPHICAL APPRECIATION

could well have been more so. For a score of years, his annual
income ranged from fifty thousand to one hundred and fifty thousaud
dollars. He did not dissipate nor gamble, and yet did not own a
foot of earth, nor even the house in whick he died; and his
personal property did not exceed in value ten thousand dollars. He
had often made that much in a day or two. With the income of a
prince, he died in comparative poverty. What had become of his
money? Such of it as had not been lavished on his loved ones had
been given to others. If we apply the term "philanthmpist" to one
who gives a part of his possessions, expecting, in return, honor in
this world, and a reward in another, what term shall we apply to
him who gave all, expecting neither of these?

     In this connection, both justice and accuracy require a word
of comment upon the assertion, frequently made, that Ingersoll
cared nothing for money. It implies, of course, that his monetary
generosity was not generosity at all. Now, it is true that he did
not care for money for money's sake; that he did not make a fetich
of money. He did not care for a dollar, nor, appreciably, for a
thousand dollars; but he cared for a million dollars -- not for
what it is in itself, but for the comforts and luxuries which it
brings. And no one had the capacity to enjoy them more than he. In
this sense, he cared a great deal for money.

     In considering his ministrations to the unfortunate, it would
be impossible to give due credit to his personality without
mentioning a remarkable faculty to which as yet I have not alluded.
I refer to his influence over the insane.

     For instance, during his eady legal practice, in Illinois, an
old coal-miner, surnamed Thomas, was visited at his (Thomas') house
by three men, now supposed to have been strikers, a strike then
being in progress. The old man, fearing that they had come to take
his life, fired from a window and killed one of them. In a trial
for murder, Ingersoll defended Thomas, who was acquitted. But he
shortly became insane -- from remorse, it was said. At times he was
quite rational; at others, violent. Aware of the calmative
influence exerted upon him by the personality of Ingersoll, he soon
came to regard the latter as his protector. And so, at the approach
of a mental attack, he would leave his home, on the Kickapoo, and,
accompanied by his scraggy old dog, go straight to Ingersoll's
house, in Peoria. He would follow the latter to his office, and
remain till Ingersoll went home; then he would sit all night on the
veranda -- always perfectly contented so long as he was near to
Ingersoll, but wild with fear if they became separated by any
considerable distance. In a few days, the mental storm having
subsided, he and his faithful old dog would trudge back to the
Kirkapoo, -- to return again in a few months, perhaps, perhaps not
for a year.

     Ingersoll was once riding in a train, near Worcester, Mass.,
he being seated alone, when a strange man who had been eyeing him
intently for some time, approached and asked permission to sit with
him. "You look so restful," he said to Ingersoll, by way of excuse.
Presently he commenced to pour his confidences into Ingersoll's
ears, stating, among other things, that he had just escaped from an
asylum, to which he was sent because the doctrine of hell-fire, 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               229

             INGERSOLL, A BIOGRAPHICAL APPRECIATION

taught him hy his mother, made him insane. Remarkable coincidence
-- a victim of the idea of infinite revenge appealing to its arch
enemy for comfort and protection! Strange confirmation of the Great
Agnostic's assertion, that one who really believes in everlasting
punishment will go insane!

     Believing that the mentally unbalanced, like others, are
amenable to kindness, Ingersoll, as a rule, did not unnecessarily
question their vagaries or delusions. On at least one occasion,
however, his method was humorously different from this. He was
again riding in a train, when a strange man suddenly came to his
seat and asked:

     "Do you know God?"

     Instantly recognizing that his questioner was insane,
Ingersoll replied, -- with face as solemn as a tombstone: "No: I
don't know God, but I know Mrs. God."

     The lunatic's countenance, as he momentarily stared at
Ingersoll, assumed, it is said, a look which unmistakably indicated
that in its owner's opinion he was not the only crazy man in that
car! Completely nonplussed, he straightway took his seat,
preserving unbroken silence as long as the two occupied the same
car.

     These arc but a few of the many instances which might be cited
to show that Ingersoll possessed -- and, too, quite in addition to
his tact and wit -- an unusual power over the unfortunate
individuals concerned. It was doubtless simply a particular
manifestation of that general feeling of trust and coufidence which
he inspired, in greater or less degree, in all with whom he came in
contact.

     His treatment of those misguided persons who assumed toward
him the role of enemy affords ample proof of his mental largeness
and magnanimity. Bitterly as he was hated by some, he never hated
in return. In his great heart there was no room for malice. "It is
of no use to raise snakes in your bosom -- you have to sleep with
them," he would say. And so he never indulged in a pectoral
menagerie of any kind. Of course he did not claim to love his
enemies, because he knew that it was impossible for him to love
them; and he believed it to be quite as impossible for others to
love theirs. He did not believe in miracles, either physical or
emotional; but he did believe in the "reciprocity" of Confucius.
Like that great sage and moralist, his practice was: --

     "For benefits return benifits; for injuries return justice,
without admixture of revenge."

     A series of incidents that occurred in Illinois will serve to
illustrate not only his practice of this rule of ethics, but the
way in which he was so often misunderstood.

     A minister, during a call at Ingersoll's home, began to
indulge in the usual clerical animadversions on Voltaire, for whom
Ingersoll, as we have learned, entertained inordinate admiration
and love. The latter asked his reverend guest whether he had read 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               230

             INGERSOLL, A BIOGRAPHICAL APPRECIATION

the immortal Frenchman. The minister replied, that he had read
everything that Voltaire wrote. Ingersoll doubted this, but said
nothing to indicate his doubt. The conversation continued for a few
minutes, when he went to his library, and, returning with a book,
read aloud a favorite selection. The minister expressed great
admiration for it, and inquired the namne of its author. In
silence, Ingersoll handed his visitor the volume: it was Voltaire!
In the breast of this Protestant clergyman of the prairies, --
rendered vulnerable by pretence, -- Ingersoll, in silence, had
pierced as sharp a wound as Voltaire himself was wont to inflict
with words.

     The clergyman straightway took his departure, and subsequently
preached a series of sermons that were both critical and abusive of
the Great Agnostic. But the latter was as silent as when he handed
the book to their prospective author.

     A few years later, the minister made it his privi-lege to
attend (in some town not far from Peoria) a political meeting at
which Ingersoll spoke. After the meeting, the minister made it his
further privilege to occupy a seat in the conveyance by which the
speaker returned to his hotel. Upon reaching the latter, the
clergyman asked to see Ingersoll in private. His request granted,
he explained that he had grown somewhat, intellectually, since the
incident concerning Voltaire; that he understood Ingersoll better,
and wished to be forgiven for having preached the abusive sermons.
He was generously absolved from the sin.

     This one sample of the immense totality of evidence, that
Ingersoll lived, in private, to his publicly professed ideal of the
treatment of one's enemies, mast here suffice. It is obviously
impracticable to do more than to indicate the conduct that was 
characteristic of him in this regard.

     The same is true concerning his practice of all the other
ideals and precepts of his philosophy. Hence, the aim of this
chapter has been, not a catalogue of acts, but a characterization.

     If the latter has been even partially realized, it has brought
us to the unmistakable and unavoidable conclusion: That Ingersoll
did "practise what he preached"; that he was a perfect husband and
father, a faithful, generous friend, a kind employer; that he was
invariably courteous to straugers; that he was a true
philanthmpist, -- loving his fellow-men regardless of race, or
color, or creed, -- doing his utmost for the poor and wretched, and
pitying even the criminal and despised; that he was just to his
enemies -- in short, that he was supreme in every relation of life;
and that, as we accepted Ingersoll's philosophy after considering
its precepts and doctrines, so now, having considered Ingersoll's
conduct, we must accept Ingersoll the philosopher -- Ingersoll the
man.

                          ****     ****

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

                          ****     ****


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               231
