
Chatting with Blacknight on the Double Bogus
--------------------------------------------

[BK] yea?

Hi. I was wondering if I could take a look at your 'buffered fights' with
the NecromansteR?

[BK] why? what has he said to u?

He sounds like a jerk to me. I thought they'd be interesting to see how he
really is.

[BK] yea, well, to make it easier i can jsut tell u

ah. so is it true the Necromancer lives in michigan?

[BK] He lives in Livonia and I have his address and phone # and REAL name
somewhere around here..Ralph Hargis

hmm. Ralph. Isn't he in First class?

[BK] yea, that group died tho..they don't crask SHIT now-a-days..he just passes
around the cracks from USA Alliance and Coast to Coast

shit. I hear US Alliance is really lame.

[BK] I dunno anything about em..I know coast to coast does a good job getting
things out...They've cracked just about everything..and Club 96 cracks ALL the
GS stuff

On Arkanoid it says Necromancer joined club 96. is this true?

[BK] I don't think so...I really doubt that one..I mean REALLY! They think he's
an ass! Someone was putting title pages on new cracks that SAID it was cracked
by First Class but they were just making fun of them..Necromancer IS a good
programmer but he doesn't do anything nowadays

too bad. Who are the other members of first class?

[BK] The Baron (all he does is make graphic title pages) and Mind Bender (he
gets the wares from the stores) and Necromancer cracks them..small group

I heard that Baron and Mind Bender are basically cool guys but it's just
Necromancer that everybody hates alot.

[BK] yea, i dunno about the other 2..they might be kool...Necromancer is stuck
up tho..U should talk to him voice on the phone, he thinks he's GOD and rules
everything..He cracks games to get attention..he doesn't even play them!

shit. that sounds stupid. could i have his phone #?

[BK] Yea..i got one of em...I think this one is his answering machine..I pissed
him off and he gave his pass and id# to everyone on Deathstar so they could d.l
whatever they wanted from here because necromancer has a lot of credit on
here..The only person to actually use it tho was Dr. Duplicate who's a real
looser

hmm. so what's the phone number?

[BK] it's 462-2026

hmm. that's in livonia you said?

[BK] yea..and baron lives in northville

how do you know that?

[BK] I'm psychic! no..really, i do know people who know them pretty good..

like who?

[BK] people on out of state boards

Ah. one more question. do you know how old Necromancer is?

[BK] I THINK 19..i dunno..he SAID he already graduated but I guess he's too
stupid to go and get a job

ah. well i'll call again tomorrow. i gotta hear this guys voice!

[BK] ask him about him being a certified developer for apple computer..he SAYS
he gets all the BEST prices on all apple hardware and all..and he thinks the
MAC rules the computer world

developer? haha. yea right!

[BK] I think he is..but I dunno..he says he can get a GS for about $550..I can
get one for about $666 so it doesn't really matter..he was going to sell me one
of his and that's how i got talking to him

ok. well nice talking to you. see you later.

[BK] Ok, c ya..gotta fix some of these bugs..they don't always work tho..it's
weird..sometimes it'll give a syntax error and other times it works..I guess
that's what we get for making software from scratch

see ya
