(==)--(==)--(==)--(*)--(==)--(==)--(==)
(::)  Cat-term 1.2 by The Gryphon  (::)
(==)--(==)--(==)--(*)--(==)--(==)--(==)

  Cat-term was designed to be a small
terminal program with only the best
features incorporated into it. Among
these are a 28K capture buffer, a busy/
ring detect, and a catsend auto dialer.
Below is an explaination of Cat-term's
features.
%>-----------------------------------<%

A) Auto search. This option is used
to connect with a terminal that has
already been called, and is sending out
a carrier. Essentially, auto search
simply jumps over the dialing routine,
and goes right to the carrier detect
routine.

B) Buffer on/off. This will allow you
to toggle the capture buffer as receiv-
ing or not receiving. All captured data
can be later viewed or written to disk.

C) Clear buffer. Erases all memory in
buffer.

D) Dial a number. This should be self-
explanatory. There are a few features
that do need some explaination. when
typing out the # to dial, including a
'+' will make the terminal wait until
it hears a tone (dial tone, sprint
tone, etc.) It will then continue to
dial the number. After completing the
dialing procedure, it jumps to the
carrier detect mode. This will not only
search for a carrier, but it will also
count the amount of rings/busy signals
it has heard, and hang up/redial after
a designated amount of either. The
terminal will continue to auto-dial the
number entered until you press escape.
When it connects, it will either enter
Cat-term, or Catsend, whichever you
have told it to do.

E) Enter Cat-term. This option is for
use when you have already connected,
and are on-line, and wish to get back
into the terminal program.

H) Hang up.

L) Length of buffer. This gives you the
length (in hex bytes) of the capture
buffer. The maximum it can hold is 
$7000 (28K.)

T) Toggle connect. This toggles between
catsend and Cat-term. If you choose
Cat-term, it will enter Cat-term when
it detects a carrier. If you choose
Catsend, it will ask you to insert a
disk with catsend 3.0 on it, and press
a key. If you hit <ESC> you will go
back to the main menu. Any other key
loads catsend into memory. Cat-term
and catsend occupy different ranges of
memory, so both can be in at once.
You must clear or write the buffer
before loading catsend, as it will
over-write it. When it detects a 
carrier, it will give a page, and jump
directly into catsend.

V) View buffer. This allows you to see
the contents of the capture buffer.
pressing any key during this starts/
stops the listing, and <ESC> gets you
back to the main menu.

W) Write buffer. This writes the con-
tents of the current buffer into a
text file, and clears the buffer's
memory.

X) Exit to basic. You must write or
clear buffer before you do this.

?) Gives you a menu of commands.

/--------------\
! Misc. notes  !
\--------------/

  When in Cat-term, you begin in normal
typing mode. This is for people who
have a ][e. If you have a ][+ with
a shiftkey mod, pressing ctrl-Q will
toggle between caps lock and shift-
key mod. Also, for ][+ users, press-
ing Ctrl-@, Ctrl-], and Ctrl-^ will
produce \, [, and _, respectively.
Pressing <ESC> gets you back to the
main menu, but does not disconnect you.
To get back to the terminal, press E.
  Also, there are a number of areas
in memory that can be changed to suit
the users needs. Below is a list of
these locations, and what they do.


  $BB3: 1=pulse dialing/0=tone dialing.
 $1224: Terminal cursor character. Here
        are some samples:

        $20: inverse space.
        $A0: no cursor.
        $DF: _ (underline character.)

 $1301: # of busies before redial.
 $1305: # of rings before redial.



 That's about it, and if you have any
questions, or find any bugs, leave me
mail on The Barracks, Sherwood Forest
][ or ///, or the King's Lair.

                        -The Gryphon
                         3/17/85