-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-
-                                     -
- CatLine 3.8          By THE Tracker -
-                                     -
_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_

    Yes, folks, I've decided to upgrade
the good old 3.5 and now you have 3.8!
You amy notice that the upgrade is lots
smaller, but the program's MUCH better.
Some added features are Ask For Name
(AFN) and Cursor Control (CC).  Also,
I made the whole program in upper-case
because it seems many haven't got lower
case (those people who ride dinosaurs
to work).  Anyways, enjoy the program
and get loose.  Call me for any mods
or suggestions at [206]584-6900 (my
CatSend line operating under CatLine
3.9!)... I may introduce the rolling
cursor setup in a future revision- call
and tell me what you think.  Thanx, THE
                                Tracker


    To operate the program, BLOAD the
program CATSEND LINE, CATLINE or
whatever you call it.  This is NOT
CatSend.  After you BLOAD it, BRUN the
update that I wrote.  In other words,
BLOAD CATSEND LINE
BRUN CATLINE 3.8 UPDATE
and there you have it.

       ;;;;     First BRUN     ;;;;

    When the program comes up, you are
asked which welcome message to run.
What we are talking about is after the
AFN (see above), CatLine will read a
welcome message.  In the old 3.0, it
would read the file "CAT.HELLO".  In
my 3.8, you can have it read any of 9
files, from "CAT.H1" to "CAT.H9".  The
program uses the "#" symbol to stand
for the number you typed in.  This is a
handy feature I put for my own use but
seems to be very popular.  Have 2
welcome messages- the first saying you
aren't home or whatever and the second
saying please page, I'm here.  This way
you can set it up and leave it alone.
Also see the <P>age function below and
the # function off of the main menu.
    After you enter a number, the
screen will clear and ask you if you
want to turn on or off the <P>age
function.  Press either Y or N.  If you
choose to have it on, when a user
presses the "P" key it will say Paging
and beep it's ass off.  If you say not
to turn it on, if they press "P" they
will get a rolling cursor and a "Sysop
not avaible- try later!" message.
Whichever you choose, the program will
either say "Pager on..." or "Pager
off...".

       ++ +   MAIN MENU   + ++

    Here at the main menu, you have 7
options, plus a status line.  All the
status line tells you is: 1] number of
callers and 2] if the pager is on or
off.  The seven options are covered
below.  Remember: at this menu, the
program will accept either a keypress
OR a telephone ring.

-=-=-=-=-=-=- The Options -=-=-=-=-=-=-

   _#_  Change Welcome Message Number
        See above, in the first run
        section.
   _W_  Welcome Message re-write
        When a caller first calls, the
        first thing he/she/it sees is
        a message that normally says
        "WELCOME!".  This feature lets
        you change that message to
        anything of equal length.  The
        next version will have ANY
        length.
   _+_  Send Carrier over Phone Line
        Pressing the plus sign from the
        main menu will send a carrier
        over the phone line so the
        other end can connect up.
   _P_  Pager status (on/off)
        Also see above, the First BRUN
        section.
   _N_  New Cursor (the CC feature!)
        This is the CC feature talked
        about above.  You can choose
        this option and change the
        cursor from that ugly inverse
        space to almost anything.  You
        will be prompted to enter a
        two digit hex number and it
        will convert to ASCII.  Some
        nice cursor characters are the
        slash (/), backslash (\), the
        period (.), and the dash (-).
   _C_  Change over the prompt
        Say you don't like the prompt,
        )>?  Choose this option to make
        it anything you want.
   _B_  Boot Diskette in Drive 1
        Just what it says, doofy.
        Press B and slide the disk in.
        Press another key to boot.  If
        you want to abort back to the
        main menu, press ESC.

 ::: When the Call Start Rolling In :::

    (this section covers what the
remote user sees.)
    Well, after someone calls, the
first thing the caller will see in the
"WELCOME!" message (or whatever you
changed it to.  See above in the menu
section, under the W command.
    After the welcome message, the
"AFN" feature kicks in.  This will
ask the caller for their alias and
put it on the top line of the screen,
with the prefix "NAME:".  In other
words, if I typed in "THE Tracker", it
would put at the top "NAME:THE TRACKER"
and continue on.  After this, the
program will read the selected welcome
message, from CAT.H1 to CAT.H9.  See
above in the First BRUN section and in
the menu section, under the "#" command
there.  After that, it operates as a
normal CatLine.  You can press CTRL-T
to break in and chat with the user on-
line, and you will know them too!
(remember, the name on the top?)  A
very nice function, if I say so myself.

---------------------------------------

=END=


