
                        Disk Arranger 3.0 Docs

                          by the Bushwhacker
                              May 2, 1985


For all you hard drive fans out there, Disk Arranger 3.0 is a utility that
allows you to modify your DOS 3.3 catalogs (ie. delete, undelete, arrange, 
lock, etc.) as well as transfer files between hard drive volumes or between 
hard drive and floppy disk. It is basically just Disk Arranger 2.0 that has 
been modified to allow the volume number to be input. The disk map has also
been fixed to be in a more standard format. If you don't have a hard drive yet,
if still works correctly with floppy disks (one or more drives).

Any volume number from 0 to 255 can be used. A volume number of 0 will match
anything, and is usually used for floppy disks. Any other number will access
the specific volume only. 

There are some limitations, however. It currently will not work with the large 
DOS volumes, or any DOS volume that has a non-standard number of tracks per 
volume or sectors per track. This is something that I am still looking at. The 
Sider large volumes have 50 tracks per volume and 32 sectors per track, while 
the small volumes are the standard 35 tracks with 16 sectors each.

The DOS that is resident when Disk Arranger 3.0 is run must be patched to 
access the hard drive. If the program is loaded from the hard drive, then this 
is obviously not a problem. If you load from a floppy, then you may need to 
patch DOS. If you have a Sider, the DOS patch is simple:

        BD00- 20 11 C7   JSR $C711  (if the controller is in slot 7)
        BD03- 00         BRK


Since most hard drives don't put a DOS image on tracks 0-2, the Disk Arranger 
will not find a Hello program there.

If you want to set up your printer for the ^P hardcopy option, there is a nine
byte string from $80D to $815 that is used to initialize the interface card and
printer each time ^P is pressed. You can put in any string you want there, but
follow it with a 00 byte! For example, if the string is:

                Control-I 80N

then the following bytes would be input:

                80D: 89 B8 B0 CE 8D 00

Also, at $80C is the Form Feed character ($0C). If you don't want a Form Feed
after each page is output, then change it to a Line Feed ($0A). If your printer
interface is not in slot 1, you will have to change location $80B to $Cx, where
x is the slot number.

If you wish to make all this permanent, first BLOAD DISK ARRANGER 3, then make
your mods, then BSAVE DISK ARRANGER 3,A$803,L$2AE1.
