                        25 page printout.

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

                          ****     ****

          This file, its printout, or copies of either
          are to be copied and given away, but NOT sold.

          Bank of Wisdom, Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201

                The Works of ROBERT G. INGERSOLL

                          ****    ****

                           THE GHOSTS

                              1877

        Let them cover their Eyeless Sockets with their 
            Fleshless Hands and fade forever from the
                       imagination of Men.

     There are three theories by which men account for all
phenomena, for everything that happens: First, the Supernatural;
Second, the Supernatural and Natural; Third, the Natural. Between
these theories there has been, from the dawn of civilization, a
continual conflict. In this great war, nearly all the soldiers have
been in the ranks of the supernatural. The believers in the
supernatural insist that matter is controlled and directed entirely
by powers from without; while naturalists maintain that Nature acts
from within; that Nature is not acted upon; that the universe is
all there is; that Nature with infinite arms embraces everything
that exists, and that all supposed powers beyond the limits of the
material are simply ghosts. You say, "Oh, this is materialism!"
What is matter? I take in my hand some earth: -- in this dust put
seeds. Let the arrows of light from the quiver of the sun smite
upon it; let the rain fall upon it. The seeds will grow and a plant
will bud and blossom. Do you understand this? Can you explain it
better than you can the production of thought? Have you the
slightest conception of what it really is? And yet you speak of
matter as though acquainted with its origin, as though you had torn
from the clenched hands of the rocks the secrets of material
existence. Do you know what force is? Can you account for molecular
action? Are you really familiar with chemistry, and can you account
for the loves and hatreds of the atoms? Is there not something in
matter that forever eludes? After all, can you get beyond, above or
below appearances? Before you cry "materialism!" had you not better
ascertain what matter really is? Can you think even of anything
without a material basis? Is it possible to imagine the
annihilation of a single atom? Is it possible for you to conceive
of the creation of an atom? Can you have a thought that was not
suggested to you by what you call matter?

     Our fathers denounced materialism, and accounted for all
phenomena by the caprice of gods and devils.

     For thousands of years it was believed that ghosts, good and
bad, benevolent and malignant, weak and powerful, in some
mysterious way, produced all phenomena; that disease and health,
happiness and misery, fortune and misfortune, peace and war, life 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                                1

                           THE GHOSTS

and death, success and failure, were but arrows from the quivers of
these ghosts; that shadowy phantoms rewarded and punished mankind;
that they were pleased and displeased by the actions of men; that
they sent and withheld the snow, the light, and the rain; that they
blessed the earth with harvests or cursed it with famine; that they
fed or starved the children of men; that they crowned and uncrowned
kings; that they took sides in war; that they controlled the winds;
that they gave prosperous voyages, allowing the brave mariner to
meet his wife and child inside the harbor bar, or sent the storms,
strewing the sad shores with wrecks of ships and the bodies of men.

     Formerly, these ghosts were believed to be almost innumerable.
Earth, air, and water were filled with these phantom hosts. In
modem times they have greatly decreased in number, because the
second theory, -- a mingling of the supernatural and natural, --
has generally been adopted. The remaining ghosts, however, are
supposed to perform the same offices as the hosts of yore.

     It has always been believed that these ghosts could in some
way be appeased; that they could be flattered by sacrifices, by
prayer, by fasting, by the building of temples and cathedrals, by
the blood of men and beasts, by forms and ceremonies, by chants, by
kneeling and prostrations, by flagellations and maiming, by
renouncing the joys of home, by living alone in the wide desert, by
the practice of celibacy, by inventing instruments of torture, by
destroying men, women and children, by covering the earth with
dungeons, by burning unbelievers, by putting chains upon the
thoughts and manacles upon the limbs of men, by believing things
without evidence and against evidence, by disbelieving and denying
demonstration, by despising facts, by hating reason, by denouncing
liberty, by maligning heretics, by slandering the dead, by
subscribing to senseless and cruel creeds, by discouraging
investigation, by worshiping a book, by the cultivation of
credulity, by observing certain times and days, by counting beads,
by gazing at crosses, by hiring others to repeat verses and
prayers, by burning candles and ringing bells, by enslaving each
other and putting out the eyes of the soul. All this has been done
to appease and flatter these monsters of the air.

     In the history of our poor world, no horror has been omitted,
no infamy has been left undone by the believers in ghosts, -- by
the worshipers of these fleshless phantoms. And yet these shadows
were born of cowardice and malignity. They were painted by the
pencil of fear upon the canvas of ignorance by that artist called
superstition.

     From these ghosts, our fathers received information. They were
the schoolmasters of our ancestors. They were the scientists and
philosophers, the geologists, legislators, astronomers, physicians,
metaphysicians and historians of the past. For ages these ghosts
were supposed to be the only source of real knowledge. They
inspired men to write books, and the books were considered sacred.
If facts were found to be inconsistent with these books, so much
the worse for the facts, and especially for their discoverers. It
was then, and still is, believed that these books are the basis of
the idea of immortality; that to give up these volumes, or rather
the idea that they are inspired, is to renounce the idea of 
immortality. This I deny.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                                2

                           THE GHOSTS

     The idea of immortality, that like a sea has ebbed and flowed
in the human heart, with its countless waves of hope and fear,
beating against the shores and rocks of time and fate, was not born
of any book, nor of any creed, nor of any religion. It was born of
human affection, and it will continue to ebb and flow beneath the
mists and clouds of doubt and darkness as long as love kisses the
lips of death. It is the rainbow -- Hope shining upon the tears of
grief.

     From the books written by the ghosts we have at last
ascertained that they knew nothing about the world in which we
live. Did they know anything about the next? Upon every point where
contradiction is possible, they have been contradicted.

     By these ghosts, by these citizens of the air, the affairs of
government were administered; all authority to govern came from
them. The emperors, kings and potentates all had commissions from
these phantoms. Man was not considered as the source of any power
whatever. To rebel against the king was to rebel against the
ghosts, and nothing less than the blood of the offender could
appease the invisible phantom or the visible tyrant. Kneeling was
the proper position to be assumed by the multitude. The prostrate
were the good. Those who stood erect were infidels and traitors. In
the name and by the authority of the ghosts, man was enslaved,
crushed, and plundered. The many toiled wearily in the storm and
sun that the few favorites of the ghosts might live in idleness.
The many lived in huts, and caves, and dens, that the few might
dwell in palaces. The many covered themselves with rags, that the
few might robe themselves in purple and in gold. The many crept,
and cringed, and crawled, that the few might tread upon their flesh
with iron feet.

     From the ghosts men received, not only authority, but
information of every kind. They told us the form of this earth.
They informed us that eclipses were caused by the sins of man; that
the universe was made in six days; that astronomy, and geology were
devices of wicked men, instigated by wicked ghosts; that gazing at
the sky with a telescope was a dangerous thing; that digging into
the earth was sinful curiosity; that trying to be wise above what
they had written was born of a rebellious and irreverent spirit.

     They told us there was no virtue like belief, and no crime
like doubt; that investigation was pure impudence, and the
punishment therefor, eternal torment. They not only told us all
about this world, but about two others; and if their statements
about the other worlds are as true as about this, no one can
underestimate the value of their information.

     For countless ages the world was governed by ghosts, and they
spared no pains to change the eagle of the human intellect into a
bat of darkness. To accomplish this infamous purpose; to drive the
love of truth from the human heart; to prevent the advancement of
mankind; to shut out from the world every ray of intellectual
light; to pollute every mind with superstition, the power of kings,
the cunning and cruelty of priests, and the wealth of nations were
exhausted.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                                3

                           THE GHOSTS

     During these years of persecution, ignorance, superstition and
slavery, nearly all the people, the kings, lawyers, doctors, the
learned and the unlearned, believed in that frightful production of
ignorance, fear, and faith, called witchcraft. They believed that
man was the sport and prey of devils. They really thought that the
very air was thick with these enemies of man. With few exceptions,
this hideous and infamous belief was universal. Under these
conditions, progress was almost impossible.

     Fear paralyzes the brain. Progress is born of courage, Fear
believes -- courage doubts. Fear falls upon the earth and prays --
courage stands erect and thinks. Fear retreats -- courage advances.
Fear is barbarism -- courage is civilization. Fear believes in
witchcraft, in devils and in ghosts. Fear is religion courage is
science.

     The facts, upon which this terrible belief rested, were proved
over and over again in every court of Europe. Thousands confessed
themselves guilty -- admitted that they had sold themselves to the
devil. They gave the particulars of the sale; told what they said
and what the devil replied. They confessed this, when they knew
that confession was death; knew that their property would be
confiscated, and their children left to beg their bread. This is
one of the miracles of history -- one of the strangest
contradictions of the human mind. Without doubt, they really
believed themselves guilty. In the first place, they believed in
witchcraft as a fact, and when charged with it, they probably
became insane. In their insanity they confessed their guilt. They
found themselves abhorred and deserted -- charged with a crime that
they could not disprove. Like a man in quicksand, every effort only
sunk them deeper. Caught in this frightful web, at the mercy of the
spiders of superstition, hope fled, and nothing remained but the
insanity of confession. The whole world appeared to be insane.

     In the time of James the First, a man was executed for causing
a storm at sea with the intention of drowning one of the royal
family. How could he disprove it? How could he show that he did not
cause the storm? All storms were at that time generally supposed to
be caused by the devil -- the prince of the power of the air -- and
by those whom he assisted.

     I implore you to remember that the believers in such
impossible things were the authors of our creeds and confessions of
faith.

     A woman was tried and convicted before Sir Matthew Hale, one
of the great judges and lawyers of England, for having caused
children to vomit crooked pins. She was also charged with having
nursed devils. The learned Judge charged the intelligent jury that
there was no doubt as to the existence of witches; that it was
established by all history, and expressly taught by the Bible.

     The woman was hanged and her body burned.

     Sir Thomas More declared that to give up witchcraft was to
throw away the sacred Scriptures. In my judgment, he was right.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                                4

                           THE GHOSTS

     John Wesley was a firm believer in ghosts and witches, and
insisted upon it, years after all laws upon the subject had been
repealed in England. I beg of you to remember that John Wesley was
the founder of the Methodist Church.

     In New England, a woman was charged with being a witch, and
with having changed herself into a fox. While in that condition she
was attacked and bitten by some dogs. A committee of three men, by
order of the court, examined this woman. They removed her clothing
and searched for "witch spots." That is to say, spots into which
needles could be thrust without giving her pain. They reported to
the court that such spots were found. She denied, however, that she
ever had changed herself into a fox. Upon the report of the
committee she was found guilty and actually executed. This was done
by our Puritan fathers, by the gentlemen who braved the dangers of
the deep for the sake of worshiping God and persecuting their
fellow-men.

     In those days people believed in what was known as lycanthropy
-- that is, that persons, with the assistance of the devil, could
assume the form of wolves. An instance is given where a man was
attacked by a wolf. He defended himself, and succeeded in cutting
off one of the animal's paws. The wolf ran away. The man picked up
the paw, put it in his pocket and carried it home. There he found
his wife with one of her hands gone. He took the paw from his
pocket. It had changed to a human hand. He charged his wife with
being a witch. She was tried. She confessed her guilt, and was
burned.

     People were burned for causing frosts in summer -- for
destroying crops with hail -- for causing storms -- for making cows
go dry, and even for souring beer. There was no impossibility for
which some one was not tried and convicted. The life of no one was
secure. To be charged, was to be convicted. Every man was at the
mercy of every other. This infamous belief was so firmly seated in
the minds of the people, that to express a doubt as to its truth
was to be suspected. Whoever denied the existence of witches and
devils was denounced as an infidel.

     They believed that animals were often taken possession of by
devils, and that the killing of the animal would destroy the devil.
They absolutely tried, convicted, and executed dumb beasts.

     At Basle, in 1470, a rooster was tried upon the charge of
having laid an egg. Rooster eggs were used only in making witch
ointment, -- this everybody knew. The rooster was convicted and
with all due solemnity was burned in the public square. So a hog
and six pigs were tried for having killed and partially eaten a
child. The hog was convicted, -- but the pigs, on account probably
of their extreme youth, were acquitted. As late as 1740, a cow was
tried and convicted of being possessed by a devil.

     They used to exorcise rats, locusts, snakes and vermin. They
used to go through the alleys, streets, and fields, and warn them 
to leave within a certain number of days. In case they disobeyed,
they were threatened with pains and penalties.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                                5

                           THE GHOSTS

     But let us be careful how we laugh at these things. Let us not
pride ourselves too much on the progress of our age. We must not
forget that some of our people are yet in the same intelligent
business. Only a little while ago, the governor of Minnesota
appointed a day of fasting and prayer, to see if some power could
not be induced to kill the grasshoppers, or send them into some
other state.

     About the close of the fifteenth century, so great was the
excitement with regard to the existence of witchcraft that Pope
Innocent VIII. issued a bull directing the inquisitors to be
vigilant in searching out and punishing all guilty of this crime.
Forms for the trial were regularly laid down in a book or a
pamphlet called the "Malleus Maleficorum" (Hammer of Witches),
which was issued by the Roman See. Popes Alexander, Leo, and
Adrian, issued like bulls. For two hundred and fifty years the
church was busy in punishing the impossible crime of witchcraft; in
burning, hanging and torturing men, women, and children.
Protestants were as active as Catholics, and in Geneva five hundred
witches were burned at the stake in a period of three months. About
one thousand were executed in one year in the diocese of Como. At
least one hundred thousand victims suffered in Germany alone: the
last execution (in Wurtzburg) taking place as late as 1749. Witches
were burned in Switzerland as late as 1780.

     In England the same frightful scenes were enacted. Statutes
were passed from Henry VI. to James I., defining the crime and its
punishment. The last act passed by the British parliament was when
Lord Bacon was a member of the House of Commons; and this act was
not repealed until 1736.

     Sir William Blackstone, in his Commentaries on the Laws of
England, says: "To deny the possibility, nay, actual existence of
witchcraft and sorcery, is at once flatly to contradict the word of
God in various passages both of the Old and New Testament; and the
thing itself is a truth to which every nation in the world hath in
its turn borne testimony, either by examples seemingly well
attested, or by prohibitory laws, which at least suppose the
possibility of a commerce with evil spirits."

     In Brown's Dictionary of the Bible, published at Edinburgh,
Scotland, in 1807, it is said that: "A witch is a woman that has
dealings with Satan. That such persons are among men is abundantly
plain from Scripture, and that they ought to be put to death."

     This work was re-published in Albany, New York, in 1816. No
wonder the clergy of that city are ignorant and bigoted even unto
this day.

     In 1716, Mrs Hicks and her daughter, nine years of age, were
hanged for selling their souls to the devil, and raising a storm by
pulling off their stockings and making a lather of soap.

     In England it has been estimated that at least thirty thousand
were hanged and burned. The last Victim executed in Scotland,
perished in 1722. "She was an innocent old woman, who had so little
idea of her situation as to rejoice at the sight of the fire which
was destined to consume her. She had a daughter, lame both of hands

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                                6

                           THE GHOSTS

and of feet -- a circumstance attributed to the witch having been
used to transform her daughter into a pony and getting her shod by
the devil."

     In 1692, nineteen persons were executed and one pressed to
death in Salem, Massachusetts, for the crime of witchcraft.

     It was thought in those days that men and women made compacts
with the devil, orally and in writing. That they abjured God and
Jesus Christ, and dedicated themselves wholly to the devil. The
contracts were confirmed at a general meeting of witches and
ghosts, over which the devil himself presided; and the persons
generally signed the articles of agreement with their own blood.
These contracts were, in some instances, for a few years; in
others, for life. General assemblies of the witches were held at
least once a year, at which they appeared entirely naked, besmeared
with an ointment made from the bodies of unbaptized infants. "To
these meetings they rode from great distances on broomsticks,
pokers, goats, hogs, and dogs. Here they did homage to the prince
of hell, and offered him sacrifices of young children, and
practiced all sorts of license until the break of day."

     "As late as 1815, Belgium was disgraced by a witch trial; and
guilt was established by the water ordeal." "In 1836, the populace
of Hela, near Dantzic, twice plunged into the sea a woman reputed
to be a sorceress; and as the miserable creature persisted in
rising to the surface, she was pronounced guilty, and beaten to
death."

     "It was believed that the bodies of devils are not like those
of men and animals, cast in an unchangeable mould. It was thought
they were like clouds, refined and subtle matter, capable of
assuming any form and penetrating into any orifice. The horrible
tortures they endured in their place of punishment rendered them
extremely sensitive to suffering, and they continually sought a
temperate and somewhat moist warmth in order to allay their pangs.
It was for this reason they so frequently entered into men and
women."

     The devil could transport men, at his will, through the air.
He could beget children; and Martin Luther himself had come in
contact with one of these children. He recommended the mother to
throw the child into the river, in order to free their house from
the presence of a devil.

     It was believed that the devil could transform people into any
shape he pleased.

     Whoever denied these things was denounced as an infidel. All
the believers in witchcraft confidently appealed to the Bible.
Their mouths were filled with passages demonstrating the existence
of witches and their power over human beings. By the Bible they
proved that innumerable evil spirits were ranging over the world
endeavoring to ruin mankind; that these spirits possessed a power
and wisdom far transcending the limits of human faculties; that
they delighted in every misfortune that could befall the world;
that their malice was superhuman. That they caused tempests was 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                                7

                           THE GHOSTS

proved by the action of the devil toward Job; by the passage in the
book of Revelation describing the four angels who held the four
winds, and to whom it was given to afflict the earth. They believed
the devil could carry persons hundreds of miles, in a few seconds,
through the air. They believed this, because they knew that Christ
had been carried by the devil in the same manner and placed on a
pinnacle of the temple. "The prophet Habakkuk had been transported
by a spirit from Judea to Babylon; and Philip, the evangelist, had
been the object of a similar miracle; and in the same way Saint
Paul had been carried in the body into the third heaven."

     "In those pious days, they believed that Incubi and Succubi
were forever wandering among mankind, alluring, by more than human
charms, the unwary to their destruction, and laying plots, which
were too often successful, against the virtue of the saints.
Sometimes the witches kindled in the monastic priest a more
terrestrial fire. People told, with bated breath, how, under the
spell of a vindictive woman, four successive abbots in a German
monastery had been wasted away by an unholy flame."

     An instance is given in which the devil not only assumed the
appearance of a holy man, in order to pay his addresses to a lady,
but when discovered, crept under the bed, suffered himself to be
dragged out, and was impudent enough to declare that he was the
veritable bishop. So perfectly had he assumed the form and features
of the prelate that those who knew the bishop best were deceived.

     One can hardly imagine the frightful state of the human mind
during these long centuries of darkness and superstition. To them,
these things were awful and frightful realities. Hovering above
them in the air, in their houses, in the bosoms of friends, in
their very bodies, in all the darkness of night, everywhere,
around, above and below, were innumerable hosts of unclean and
malignant devils.

     From the malice of those leering and vindictive vampires of
the air, the church pretended to defend mankind. Pursued by these
phantoms, the frightened multitudes fell upon their faces and
implored the aid of robed hypocrisy and sceptered theft.

     Take from the orthodox church of to-day the threat and fear of
hell, and it becomes an extinct volcano.

     Take from the church the miraculous, the supernatural, the
incomprehensible, the unreasonable, the impossible, the unknowable,
and the absurd, and nothing but a vacuum remains.

     Notwithstanding all the infamous things justly laid to the
charge of the church, we are told that the civilization of to-day
is the child of what we are pleased to call the superstition of the
past.

     Religion has not civilized man -- man has civilized religion.
God improves as man advances.

     Let me call your attention to what we have received from the
followers of the ghosts. Let me give you an outline of the sciences
as taught by these philosophers of the clouds.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                                8

                           THE GHOSTS

     All diseases were produced, either as a punishment by the good
ghosts, or out of pure malignity by the bad ones. There were,
properly speaking, no diseases. The sick were possessed by ghosts.
The science of medicine consisted in knowing how to persuade these
ghosts to vacate the premises. For thousands of years the diseased
were treated with incantations, with hideous noises, with drums and
gongs. Everything was done to make the visit of the ghost as
unpleasant as possible, and they generally succeeded in making
things so disagreeable that if the ghost did not leave, the patient
did. These ghosts were supposed to be of different rank, power and
dignity. Now and then a man pretended to have won the favor of some
powerful ghost, and that gave him power over the little ones. Such
a man became an eminent physician.

     It was found that certain kinds of smoke, such as that
produced by burning the liver of a fish, the dried skin of a
serpent, the eyes of a toad, or the tongue of an adder, were
exceedingly offensive to the nostrils of an ordinary ghost. With
this smoke, the sick room would be filled until the ghost vanished
or the patient died.

     It was also believed that certain words, -- the names of the
most powerful ghosts, -- when properly pronounced, were very
effective weapons. It was for a long time thought that Latin words
were the best, -- Latin being a dead language, and known by the
clergy. Others thought that two sticks laid across each other and
held before the wicked ghost would cause it instantly to flee in
dread away.

     For thousands of years, the practice of medicine consisted in
driving these evil spirits out of the bodies of men.

     In some instances, bargains and compromises were made with the
ghosts. One case is given where a multitude of devils traded a man
for a herd of swine. In this transaction the devils were the
losers, as the swine immediately drowned themselves in the sea.
This idea of disease appears to have been almost universal, and is
by no means yet extinct.

     The contortions of the epileptic, the strange twitchings of
those afflicted with chorea, the shakings of palsy, dreams,
trances, and the numberless frightful phenomena produced by
diseases of the nerves, were all seized upon as so many proofs that
the bodies of men were filled with unclean and malignant ghosts.

     Whoever endeavored to account for these things by natural
causes, whoever attempted to cure diseases by natural means, was
denounced by the church as an infidel. To explain anything was a
crime. It was to the interest of the priest that all phenomena
should be accounted for by the will and power of gods and devils.
The moment it is admitted that all phenomena are within the domain
of the natural, the necessity for a priest has disappeared.
Religion breathes the air of the supernatural. Take from the mind
of man the idea of the supernatural, and religion ceases to exist.
For this reason, the church has always despised the man who
explained the wonderful. Upon this principle, nothing was left
undone to stay the science of medicine. As long as plagues and 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                                9

                           THE GHOSTS

pestilences could be stopped by prayer, the priest was useful. The
moment the physician found a cure, the priest became an
extravagance. The moment it began to be apparent that prayer could
do nothing for the body, the priest shifted his ground and began
praying for the soul.

     Long after the devil idea was substantially abandoned in the
practice of medicine, and when it was admitted that God had nothing
to do with ordinary coughs and colds, it was still believed that
all the frightful diseases were sent by him as punishments for the
wickedness of the people. It was thought to be a kind of blasphemy
to even try, by any natural means, to stay the ravages of
pestilence. Formerly during the prevalence of plague and epidemics,
the arrogance of the priest was boundless. He told the people that
they had slighted the clergy, that they had refused to pay tithes,
that they had doubted some of the doctrines of the church, and that
God was now taking his revenge. The people for the most part,
believed this infamous tissue of priestcraft. They hastened to fall
upon their knees; they poured out their wealth upon the altars of
hypocrisy; they abased and debased themselves; from their minds
they banished all doubts, and made haste to crawl in the very dust
of humility.

     The church never wanted disease to be under the control of
man. Timothy Dewight, president of Yale College, preached a sermon
against vaccination. His idea was, that if God had decreed from all
eternity that a certain man should die with the small-pox, it was
a frightful sin to avoid and annul that decree by the trick of
vaccination. Small-pox being regarded as one of the heaviest guns
in the arsenal of heaven, to spike it was the height of
presumption. Plagues and pestilences were instrumentalities in the
hands of God with which to gain the love and worship of mankind. To
find a cure for disease was to take a weapon from the church. No
one tries to cure the ague with prayer. Quinine has been found
altogether more reliable. Just as soon as a specific is found for
a disease that disease will be left out of the list of prayer. The
number of diseases with which God from time to time afflicts
mankind, is continually decreasing. In a few years all of them will
be under the control of man, the gods will be left unarmed, and the
threats of their priests will excite only a smile.

     The science of medicine has had but one enemy -- religion. Man
was afraid to save his body for fear he might lose his soul.

     Is it any wonder that the people in those days believed in and
taught the infamous doctrine of eternal punishment -- a doctrine
that makes God a heartless monster and man a slimy hypocrite and
slave?

     The ghosts were historians, and their histories were the
grossest absurdities. "Tales told by idiots, full of sound and
fury, signifying nothing." In those days the histories were written
by the monks, who, as a rule, were almost as superstitious as they
were dishonest. They wrote as though they had been witnesses of
every occurrence they related. They wrote the history of every
country of importance. They told all the past and predicted all the
future with an impudence that amounted to sublimity. "They traced 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               10

                           THE GHOSTS

the order of St. Michael, in France, to the archangel himself, and
alleged that he was the founder of a chivalric order in heaven
itself. They said that Tartars originally came from hell, and that
they were called Tartars because Tartarus was one of the names of
perdition. They declared that Scotland was so named after Scota, a
daughter of Pharaoh, who landed in Ireland, invaded Scotland, and
took it by force of arms. This statement was made in a letter
addressed to the Pope in the fourteenth century, and was alluded to
as a well-known fact. The letter was written by some of the highest
dignitaries, and by the direction of the King himself."

     These gentlemen accounted for the red on the breasts of
robins, from the fact that these birds carried water to unbaptized
infants in hell.

     Matthew, of Paris, an eminent historian of the fourteenth
century, gave the world the following piece of information: "It is
well known that Mohammed was once a cardinal, and became a, heretic
because he failed in his effort to be elected pope;" and that
having drank to excess, he fell by the roadside, and in this
condition was killed by swine. "And for that reason, his followers
abhor pork even unto this day."

     Another eminent historian informs us that Nero was in the
habit of vomiting frogs. When I read this, I said to myself: Some
of the croakers of the present day against Progress would be the
better for such a vomit.

     The history of Charlemagne was written by Turpin, of Rheims.
He was a bishop. He assures us that the walls of a city fell down
in answer to prayer. That there were giants in those days who could
take fifty ordinary men under their arms and walk away with them.
"With the greatest of these, a direct descendant of Goliath, one
Orlando had a theological discussion, and that in the heat of the
debate, when the giant was overwhelmed with the argument, Orlando
rushed forward and inflicted a fatal stab."

     The history of Britain, written by the archdeacons of Monmouth
and Oxford, was wonderfully popular. According to them, Brutus
conquered England and built the city of London. During his time, it
rained pure blood for three days. At another time, a monster came
from the sea, and, after having devoured great multitudes of
people, swallowed the king and disappeared. They tell us that King
Arthur was not born like other mortals, but was the result of a
magical contrivance; that he had great luck in killing giants; that
he killed one in France that had the cheerful habit of eating some
thirty men a day. That this giant had clothes woven of the beards
of the kings he had devoured. To cap the climax, one of the authors
of this book was promoted for having written the only reliable
history of his country.

     In all the histories of those days there is hardly a single
truth. Facts were considered unworthy of preservation. Anything
that really happened was not of sufficient interest or importance
to be recorded. The great religious historian, Eusebius,
ingenuously remarks that in his history he carefully omitted
whatever tended to discredit the church, and that he piously 
magnified all that conduced to her glory.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               11

                           THE GHOSTS

     The same glorious principle was scrupulously adhered to by all
the historians of that time.

     Pharoah's chariots were still visible on the sands of the Red
Sea, and that they had been miraculously preserved from the winds
and waves as perpetual witnesses of the great miracle there
performed.

     It is safe to say that every truth in the histories of those
times is the result of accident or mistake.

     They accounted for everything as the work of good and evil
spirits. With cause and effect they had nothing to do. Facts were
in no way related to each other. God, governed by infinite caprice,
filled the world with miracles and disconnected events. From the
quiver of his hatred came the arrows of famine, pestilence, and
death.

     The moment that the idea is abandoned that all is natural;
that all phenomena are the necessary links in the endless chain of
being, the conception of history becomes impossible. With the
ghosts, the present is not the child of the past, nor the mother of
the future. In the domain of religion all is chance, accident, and
caprice.

     Do not forget, I pray you, that our creeds were written by the
contemporaries of these historians.

     The same idea was applied to law. It was believed by our
intelligent ancestors that all law derived its sacredness and its
binding force from the fact that it had been communicated to man by
the ghosts. Of course it was not pretended that the ghosts told
everybody the law; but they told it to a few, and the few told it
to the people, and the people, as a rule, paid them exceedingly
well for their trouble. It was thousands of ages before the people
commenced making laws for themselves, and strange as it may appear,
most of these laws were vastly superior to the ghost article.
Through the web and woof of human legislation began to run and
shine and glitter the golden thread of justice.

     During these years of darkness it was believed that rather
than see an act of injustice done; rather than see the innocent
suffer; rather than see the guilty triumph, some ghost would
interfere. This belief, as a rule, gave great satisfaction to the
victorious party, and as the other man was dead, no complaint was
heard from him.

     This doctrine was the sanctification of brute force and
chance. They had trials by battle, by fire, by water, and by lot.
Persons were made to grasp hot iron, and if it burned them their
guilt was established. Others, with tied hands and feet, were cast
into the sea, and if they sank, the verdict of guilty was
unanimous, -- if they did not sink, they were in league with
devils.





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               12

                           THE GHOSTS

     So in England, persons charged with crime could appeal to the
corsned. The corsned was a piece of the sacramental bread. If the 
defendant could swallow this piece he went acquit. Godwin, Earl of
Kent, in the time of Edward the Confessor, appealed to the corsned.
He failed to swallow it and was choked to death.

     The ghosts and their followers always took delight in torture,
in cruel and unusual punishments. For the infraction of most of
their laws, death was the penalty -- death produced by stoning and
by fire. Sometimes, when man committed only murder, he was allowed
to flee to some city of refuge. Murder was a crime against man. But
for saying certain words, or denying certain doctrines, or for
picking up sticks on certain days, or for worshiping the wrong
ghost, or for failing to pray to the right one, or for laughing at
a priest, or for saying that wine was not blood, or that bread was
not flesh, or for failing to regard ram's horns as artillery, for
insisting that a dry bone was scarcely sufficient to take the place
of water works, or that a raven, as a rule, made a poor landlord:
-- death, produced by all the ways that the ingenuity of hatred
could devise, was the penalty.

     Law is a growth -- it is a science. Right and wrong exist in
the nature of things. Things are not right because they are
commanded, nor wrong because they are prohibited. There are real
crimes enough without creating artificial ones. All progress in
legislation has for centuries consisted in repealing the laws of
the ghosts.

     The idea of right and wrong is born of man's capacity to enjoy
and suffer. If man could not suffer, if he could not inflict injury
upon his fellow, if he could neither feel nor inflict pain, the
idea of right and wrong never would have entered his brain. But for
this, the word conscience never would have passed the lips of man.

     There is one good -- happiness. There is but one sin --
selfishness. All law should be for the preservation of the one and
the destruction of the other.

     Under the regime of the ghosts, laws were not supposed to
exist in the nature of things. They were supposed to be simply the
irresponsible command of a ghost. These commands were not supposed
to rest upon reason, they were the product of arbitrary will.

     The penalties for the violation of these laws were as cruel as
the laws were senseless and absurd. Working on the Sabbath and
murder were both punished with death. The tendency of such laws is
to blot from the human heart the sense of justice.

     To show you how perfectly every department of knowledge, or
ignorance rather, was saturated with superstition, I will for a
moment refer to the science of language.

     It was thought by our fathers, that Hebrew was the original
language; that it was taught to Adam in the Garden of Eden by the
Almighty, and that consequently all languages came from, and could
be traced to, the Hebrew. Every fact inconsistent with that idea  



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               13

                           THE GHOSTS

was discarded. According to the ghosts, the trouble at the tower of
Babel accounted for the fact that all people did not speak Hebrew.
The Babel business settled all questions in the science of
language.

     After a time, so many facts were found to be inconsistent with
the Hebrew idea that it began to fall into disrepute, and other
languages began to compete for the honor of being the original.

     Andre Kempe, in 1569, published a work on the language of
Paradise, in which he maintained that God spoke to Adam in Swedish;
that Adam answered in Danish; and that the serpent -- which appears
to me quite probable -- spoke to Eve in French. Erro, in a work
published at Madrid, took the ground that Basque was the language
spoken in the Garden of Eden; but in 1580 Goropius published his
celebrated work at Antwerp, in which he put the whole matter at
rest by showing, beyond all doubt, that the language spoken in
Paradise was neither more nor less than plain Holland Dutch.

     The real founder of the science of language was Liebnitz, a
contemporary of Sir Isaac Newton. He discarded the idea that all
languages could be traced to one language. He maintained that
language was a natural growth. Experience teaches us that this must
be so. Words are continually dying and continually being born.
Words are naturally and necessarily produced.  Words are the
garments of thought, the robes of ideas. Some are as rude as the
skins of wild beasts, and others glisten and glitter like silk and
gold. They have been born of hatred and revenge; of love and self-
sacrifice; of hope and fear, of agony and joy. These words are born
of the terror and beauty of nature. The stars have fashioned them.
In them mingle the darkness and the dawn. From everything they have
taken something. Words are the crystalizations of human history, of
all that man has enjoyed and suffered -- his victories and defeats
-- all that he has lost and won. Words are the shadows of all that
has been -- the mirrors of all that is.

     The ghosts also enlightened our fathers in astronomy and
geology. According to them the earth was made out of nothing, and
a little more nothing having been taken than was used in the
construction of this world, the stars were made out of what was
left over. Cosmas, in the sixth century, taught that the stars were
impelled by angels, who either carried them on their shoulders,
rolled them in front of them, or drew them after. He also taught
that each angel that pushed a star took great pains to observe what
the other angels were doing, so that the relative distances between
the stars might always remain the same. He also gave his idea as to
the form of the world.

     He stated that the world was a vast parallelogram; that on the
outside was a strip of land, like the frame of a common slate; that
then there was a strip of water, and in the middle a great piece of
land; that Adam and Eve lived on the outer strip; that their
descendants, with the exception of the Noah family, were drowned by
a flood on this outer strip; that the ark finally rested on the
middle piece of land where we now are. He accounted for night and
day by saying that on the outside strip of land there was a high  



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               14

                           THE GHOSTS

mountain, around which the sun and moon revolved, and that when the
sun was on the other side of the mountain, it was night; and when
on this side, it was day.

     He also declared that the earth was flat. This he proved by
many passages from the Bible. Among other reasons for believing the
earth to be flat, he brought forward the following: We are told in
the New Testament that Christ shall come again in glory and power.
and all the world shall see him. Now, if the world is round how are
the people on the other side going to see Christ when he comes?
That settled the question, and the church not only endorsed the
book, but declared that whoever believed less or more than stated
by Cosmas, was a heretic.

     In those blessed days, Ignorance was a king and Science an
outcast.

     They knew the moment this earth ceased to be the center of the
universe, and became a mere speck in the starry heaven of
existence, that their religion would become a childish fable of the
past.

     In the name and by the authority of the ghosts, men enslaved
their fellow-men; they trampled upon the rights of women and
children. In the name and by the authority of ghosts, they bought
and sold and destroyed each other; they filled heaven with tyrants
and earth with slaves, the present with despair and the future with
horror. In the name and by the authority of the ghosts, they
imprisoned the human mind, polluted the conscience, hardened the
heart, subverted justice, crowned robbery, sainted hypocrisy, and
extinguished for a thousand years the torch of reason.

     I have endeavored, in some faint degree, to show you what has
happened, and what always will happen when men are governed by
superstition and fear; when they desert the sublime standard of
reason; when they take the words of others and do not investigate
for themselves.

     Even the great men of those days were nearly as weak in this
matter as the most ignorant. Kepler, one of the greatest men of the
world, an astronomer second to none, although he plucked from the
stars the secrets of the universe, was an astrologer, and really
believed that he could predict the career of a man by finding what
star was in the ascendant at his birth. This great man breathed, so
to speak, the atmosphere of his time. He believed in the music of
the spheres, and assigned alto, bass, tenor, and treble to certain
stars.

     Tycho Brahe, another astronomer, kept an idiot, whose
disconnected and meaningless words he carefully set down, and then
put them together in such manner as to make prophecies, and then
waited patiently to see them fulfilled. Luther believed that he had
actually seen the devil, and had discussed points of theology with
him. The human mind was in chains. Every idea almost was a monster.
Thought was deformed. Facts were looked upon as worthless. Only the
wonderful was worth preserving. Things that actually happened were
not considered worth recording; -- real occurrences were too 
common. Everybody expected the miraculous.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               15

                           THE GHOSTS

     The ghosts were supposed to be busy; devils were thought to be
the most industrious things in the universe, and with these imps,
every occurrence of an unusual character was in some way connected.
There was no order, no serenity, no certainty in anything.
Everything depended upon ghosts and phantoms. Man was, for the most
part, at the mercy of malevolent spirits. He protected himself as
best he could with holy water and tapers and wafers and cathedrals.
He made noises and rung bells to frighten the ghosts, and he made
music to charm them. He used smoke to choke them, and incense to
please them. He wore beads and crosses. He said prayers, and hired
others to say them. He fasted when he was hungry, and feasted when
he was not. He believed everything that seemed unreasonable, just
to appease the ghosts. He humbled himself. He crawled in the dust.
He shut the doors and windows, and excluded every ray of light from
the temple of the soul. He debauched and polluted his own mind, and
toiled night and day to repair the walls of his own prison. From
the garden of his heart he plucked and trampled upon the holy
flowers of pity.

     The priests reveled in horrible descriptions of hell.
Concerning the wrath of God, they grew eloquent. They denounced man
as totally depraved. They made reason blasphemy, and pity a crime.
Nothing so delighted them as painting the torments and sufferings
of the lost. Over the worm that never dies they grew poetic; and
the second death filled them with a kind of holy delight. According
to them, the smoke and cries ascending from hell were the perfume
and music of heaven.

     At the risk of being tiresome, I have said what I have to show
you the productions of the human mind, when enslaved; the effects
of wide-spread ignorance -- the results of fear. I want to convince
you that every form of slavery is a viper, that sooner or later,
will strike its poison fangs into the bosoms of men.

     The first great step towards progress, is, for man to cease to
be the slave of man; the second, to cease to be the slave of the
monsters of his own creation -- of the ghosts and phantoms of the
air.

     For ages the human race was imprisoned. Through the bars and
grates came a few struggling rays of light. Against these grates
and bars Science pressed its pale and thoughtful face, wooed by the
holy dawn of human advancement.

     Men found that the real was the useful; that what a man knows
is better than what a ghost says; that an event is more valuable
than a prophecy. They found that diseases were not produced by
spirits, and could not be cured by frightening them away. They
found that death was as natural as life. They began to study the
anatomy and chemistry of the human body, and found that all was
natural and within the domain of law.

     The conjurer and sorcerer were discarded, and the physician
and surgeon employed. They found that the earth was not flat; that
the stars were not mere specks. They found that being born under a
particular planet had nothing to do with the fortunes of men.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               16

                           THE GHOSTS

     The astrologer was discharged and the astronomer took his
place.

     They found that the earth had swept through the constellations
for millions of ages. They found that good and evil were produced
by natural causes, and not by ghosts; that man could not be good
enough or bad enough to stop or cause a rain; that diseases were
produced as naturally as grass, and were not sent as punishments
upon man for failing to believe a certain creed. They found that
man, through intelligence, could take advantage of the forces of
nature -- that he could make the waves, the winds, the flames, and
the lightnings of heaven do his bidding and minister to his wants.
They found that the ghosts knew nothing of benefit to man; that
they were utterly ignorant of geology -- of astronomy -- of
geography; -- that they knew nothing of history; -- that they were
poor doctors and worse surgeons; -- that they knew nothing of law
and less of justice; that they were without brains. and utterly
destitute of hearts; that they knew nothing of the rights of men;
that they were despisers of women, the haters of progress, the
enemies of science, and the destroyers of liberty.

     The condition of the world during the Dark Ages shows exactly
the result of enslaving the bodies and souls of men. In those days
there was no freedom. Labor was despised, and a laborer was
considered but little above a beast. Ignorance, like a vast cowl,
covered the brain of the world, and superstition ran riot with the
imagination of man. The air was filled with angels, with demons and
monsters. Credulity sat upon the throne of the soul, and Reason was
an exiled king. A man to be distinguished must be a soldier or a
monk. War and theology, that is to say, murder and hypocrisy, were
the principal employments of man. Industry was a slave, theft was
commerce; murder was war, hypocrisy was religion.

     Every Christian country maintained that it was no robbery to
take the property of Mohammedans by force, and no murder to kill
the owners. Lord Bacon was the first man of note who maintained
that a Christian country was bound to keep its plighted faith with
an infidel nation. Reading and writing were considered dangerous
arts. Every layman who could read and write was suspected of being
a heretic. All thought was discouraged. They forged chains of
superstition for the minds, and manacles of iron for the bodies of
men. The earth was ruled by the cowl and sword, -- by the maitre
and scepter, -- by the altar and throne, -- by Fear and Force, --
by Ignorance and Faith, -- by ghouls and ghosts.

     In the fifteenth century the following law was in force in
England:

     "That whosoever reads the Scriptures in the mother tongue,
shall forfeit land, cattle, life, and goods from their heirs
forever, and so be condemned for heretics to God, enemies to the
crown, and most arrant traitors to the land."

     During the first year this law was in force thirty-nine were
hanged for its violation and their bodies burned.

     In the sixteenth century men were burned because they failed 
to kneel to a procession of monks.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               17

                           THE GHOSTS

     The slightest word uttered against the superstition of the
time was punished with death.

     Even the reformers, so-called, of those days, had no idea of
intellectual liberty -- no idea even of toleration. Luther, Knox,
Calvin, believed in religious liberty only when they were in the
minority. The moment they were clothed with power they began to
exterminate with fire and sword.

     Castalio was the first minister who advocated the liberty of
the soul. He was regarded by the reformers as a criminal, and
treated as though he had committed the crime of crimes.

     Bodinus. a lawyer of France, about the same time, wrote a few
words in favor of the freedom of conscience, but public opinion was
overwhelmingly against him. The people were ready, anxious, and
willing, with whip, and chain, and fire, to drive from the mind of
man the heresy that he had a right to think.

     Montaigne, a man blest with so much common sense that he was
the most uncommon man of his time, was the first to raise a voice
against torture in France. But what was the voice of one man
against the terrible cry of ignorant, infatuated, superstitious and
malevolent millions? It was the cry of a drowning man in the wild
roar of the cruel sea.

     In spite of the efforts of the brave few the infamous war
against the freedom of the soul was waged until at least one
hundred millions of human beings -- fathers, mothers, brothers,
sisters -- with hopes, loves, and aspirations like ourselves, were
sacrificed upon the cruel altar of an ignorant faith. They perished
in every way by which death can be produced. Every nerve of pain
was sought out and touched by the believers in ghosts.

     For my part I glory in the fact, that here in the New World,
-- in the United States, -- liberty of conscience was first
guaranteed to man, and that the Constitution of the United States
was the first great decree entered in the high court of human
equity forever divorcing church and state, -- the first injunction
granted against the interference of the ghosts. This was one of the
grandest steps ever taken by the human race in the direction of
Progress.

     You will ask what has caused this wonderful change in three
hundred years. And I answer the inventions and discoveries of the
few; -- the brave thoughts, the heroic utterances of the few; --
the acquisition of a few facts.

     Besides, you must remember that every wrong in some way tends
to abolish itself. It is hard to make a lie stand always. A lie
will not fit a fact. It will only fit another lie made for the
purpose. The life of a lie is simply a question of time. Nothing
but truth is immortal. The nobles and kings quarreled; -- the
priests began to dispute; -- the ideas of government began to
change.




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               18

                           THE GHOSTS

     In 1441 printing was discovered. At that time the past was a
vast cemetery with hardly an epitaph. The ideas of men had mostly
perished in the brain that produced them. The lips of the human
race had been sealed. Printing gave pinions to thought. It
preserved ideas. It made it possible for man to bequeath to the
future the riches of his brain, the wealth of his soul. At first,
it was used to flood the world with the mistakes of the ancients,
but since that time it has been flooding the world with light.

     When people read they begin to reason, and when they reason
they progress. This was another grand step in the direction of
Progress.

     The discovery of powder, that put the peasant almost upon a
par with the prince; -- that put an end to the so-called age of
chivalry; -- that released a vast number of men from the armies; --
that gave pluck and nerve a chance with brute strength.

     The discovery of America, whose shores were trod by the
restless feet of adventure; -- that brought people holding every
shade of superstition together; -- that gave the world an
opportunity to compare notes, and to laugh at the follies of each
other. Out of this strange mingling of all creeds, and
superstitions, and facts, and theories, and countless opinions,
came the Great Republic.

     Every fact has pushed a superstition from the brain and a
ghost from the clouds. Every mechanical art is an educator. Every
loom, every reaper and mower, every steamboat, every locomotive,
every engine, every press, every telegraph, is a missionary of
Science and an apostle of Progress. Every mill, every furnace,
every building with its wheels and levers, in which something is
made for the convenience, for the use, and for the comfort and
elevation of man, is a church, and every schoolhouse is a temple.

     Education is the most radical thing in the world.

     To teach the alphabet is to inaugurate a revolution.

     To build a schoolhouse is to construct a fort.

     Every library is an arsenal filled with the weapons and
ammunition of Progress, and every fact is a monitor with sides of
iron and a turret of steel.

     I thank the inventors, the discoverers, the thinkers. I thank
Columbus and Magellan. I thank Galileo, and Copernicus, and Kepler,
and Descartes, and Newton, and Laplace. I thank Locke, and Hume,
and Bacon, and Shakespeare, and Kant, and Fichte, and Leibnitz, and
Goethe. I thank Fulton, and Watts, and Volta, and Galvani, and
Franklin, and Morse, who made lightning the messenger of man. I
thank Humboldt, the Shakespeare of science. I thank Crompton and
Arkwright, from whose brains leaped the looms and spindles that
clothe the world. I thank Luther for protesting against the abuses
of the church, and I denounce him because he was the enemy of
liberty. I thank Calvin for writing a book in favor of religious
freedom, and I abhor him because he burned Servetus. I thank Knox 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               19

                           THE GHOSTS

for resisting Episcopal persecution, and I hate him because he
persecuted in his turn. I thank the Puritans for saying "Resistance
to tyrants is obedience to God," and yet I am compelled to say that
they were tyrants themselves. I thank Thomas Paine because he was
a believer in liberty, and because he did as much to make my
country free as any other human being. I thank Voltaire, that great
man who, for half a century, was the intellectual emperor of
Europe, and who, from his throne at the foot of the Alps, pointed
the finger of scorn at every hypocrite in Christendom. I thank
Darwin, Haeckel and Buchner, Spencer, Tyndall and Huxley, Draper,
Lecky and Buckle.

     I thank the inventors, the discoverers, the thinkers, the
scientists, the explorers. I thank the honest millions who have
toiled.

     I thank the brave men and women with brave thoughts. They are
the Atlases upon whose broad and mighty shoulders rests the grand
fabric of civilization. They are the men who have broken, and are
still breaking, the chains of Superstition. They are the Titans who
carried Olympus by assault, and who will soon stand victors upon
Sinai's crags.

     We are beginning to learn that to exchange a mistake for the
truth -- a superstition for a fact -- to ascertain the real -- is
to progress.

     Happiness is the only possible good, and all that tends to the
happiness of man is right, and is of value. All that tends to
develop the bodies and minds of men; all that gives us better
houses, better clothes, better food, better pictures, grander
music, better heads, better hearts; all that renders us more
intellectual and more loving, nearer just; that makes us better
husbands and wives, better children, better citizens -- all these
things combined produce what I call Progress.

     Man advances only as he overcomes the obstructions of Nature,
and this can be done only by labor and by thought. Labor is the
foundation of all. Without labor, and without great labor, progress
is impossible. The progress of the world depends upon the men who
walk in the fresh furrows and through the rustling corn; upon those
who sow and reap; upon those whose faces are radiant with the glare
of furnace fires; upon the delvers in the mines, and the workers in
shops; upon those who give to the winter air the ringing music of
the axe; upon those who battle with the boisterous billows of the
sea; upon the inventors and discoverers; upon the brave thinkers.

     From the surplus produced by labor, schools and universities
are built and fostered. From this surplus the painter is paid for
the productions of the pencil; the sculptor for chiseling shapeless
rock into forms divinely beautiful, and the poet for singing the
hopes, the loves, the memories, and the aspirations of the world.
This surplus has given us the books in which we converse with the
dead and living intellectual kings and queens of the human race. It
has given us all there is of beauty, of elegance, and of refined
happiness.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               20

                           THE GHOSTS

     I am aware that there is a vast difference of opinion as to
what progress really is; that many denounce the ideas of to-day as
destructive of all happiness -- of all good. I know that there are
many worshipers of the past. They venerate the ancient because it
is ancient. They see no beauty in anything from which they do not
blow the dust of ages with the breath of praise. They say, no
masters like the old; no religion, no governments like the ancient;
no orators, no poets, no statesmen like those who have been dust
for two thousand years. Others love the modern simply because it is
modern.

     We should have gratitude enough to acknowledge the obligations
we are under to the great and heroic of antiquity, and independence
enough not to believe what they said simply because they said it.

With the idea that labor is the basis of progress goes the truth
that labor must be free. The laborer must be a free man or woman.

     The free man, working for wife and child, gets his head and
hands in partnership.

     To do the greatest amount of work in the shortest space of
time, is the problem of free labor.

     Slavery does the least work in the longest space of time.

     Free labor will give us wealth. Free thought will give us
truth.

     Slowly but surely man is freeing his imagination of these
sexless phantoms, of these cruel ghosts. Slowly but surely he is
rising above the superstitions of the past. He is learning to rely
upon himself. He is beginning to find that labor is the only prayer
that ought to be answered, and that hoping, toiling, aspiring,
suffering men and women are of more importance than all the ghosts
that ever wandered through the fenceless fields of space.

     The believers in ghosts claim still, that they are the only
wise and virtuous people upon the earth; claim still, that there is
a difference between them and unbelievers so vast, that they will
be infinitely rewarded, and the others infinitely punished.

     I ask you to-night, do the theories and doctrines of the
theologians satisfy the heart or brain of the nineteenth century?

     Have the churches the confidence of mankind?

     Does the merchant give credit to a man because he belongs to
a church?

     Does the banker loan money to a man because he is a Methodist
or Baptist?

     Will a certificate of good standing in any church be taken as
collateral security for one dollar?

     Will you take the word of a church member, or his note, or his
oath, simply because he is a church member?

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               21

                           THE GHOSTS

     Are the clergy, as a class, better, kinder and more generous
to their families -- to their fellow-men -- than doctors, lawyers.
merchants and farmers?

     Does a belief in ghosts and unreasonable things necessarily
make people honest?

     When a man loses confidence in Moses, must the people lose
confidence in him?

     Does not the credit system in morals breed extravagance in
sin?

Why send missionaries to other lands while every penitentiary in
ours is filled with criminals?

     Is it philosophical to say that they who do right carry a
cross?

     Is it a source of joy to think that perdition is the
destination of nearly all of the children of men?

     Is it worth while to quarrel about original sin -- when there
is so much copy?

     Does it pay to dispute about baptism, and the Trinity, and
predestination, and apostolic succession and the infallibility of
churches, of popes and of books? Does all this do any good?

     Are the theologians welcomers of new truths? Are they noted
for their candor? Do they treat an opponent with common fairness?
Are they investigators? Do they pull forward, or do they hold back?

     Is science indebted to the church for a solitary fact?

     What church is an asylum for a persecuted truth?

     What great reform has been inaugurated by the church?

     Did the church abolish slavery?

     Has the church raised its voice against war?

     I used to think that there was in religion no real restraining
force. Upon this point my mind has changed. Religion will prevent
man from committing artificial crimes and offenses.

     A man committed murder. The evidence was so conclusive that he
confessed his guilt.

     He was asked why he killed his fellow-man.

     He replied: "For money."

     "Did you get any?"

     "Yes."


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               22

                           THE GHOSTS

     "How much?"

     "Fifteen cents."

     "What did you do with this money?"

     "Spent it."

     "What for?"

     "Liquor."

     "What else did you find upon the dead man?"

     "He had his dinner in a bucket -- some meat and bread."

     "What did you do with that?"

     "I ate the bread."

     "What did you do with the meat?"

     "I threw it away."

     "Why?"

     "It was Friday."

     Just to the extent that man has freed himself from the
dominion of ghosts he has advanced. Just to the extent that he has
freed himself from the tyrants of his own creation he has
progressed. Just to the extent that he has investigated for himself
he has lost confidence in superstition.

     With knowledge obedience becomes intelligent acquiescence --
it is no longer degrading. Acquiescence in the understood -- in the
known -- is the act of a sovereign, not of a slave. It ennobles, it
does not degrade.

     Man has found that he must give liberty to others in order to
have it himself. He has found that a master is also a slave; --
that a tyrant is himself a serf. He has found that governments
should be founded and administered by man and for man; that the
rights of all are equal; that the powers that be are not ordained
by God; that woman is at least the equal of man; that men existed
before books; that religion is one of the phases of thought through
which the world is passing; that all creeds were made by man; that
everything is natural; that a miracle is an impossibility; that we
know nothing of origin and destiny; that concerning the unknown we
are all equally ignorant; that the pew has the right to contradict
what the pulpit asserts; that man is responsible only to himself
and those he injures, and that all have a right to think.

     True religion must be free. Without perfect liberty of the
mind there can he no true religion. Without liberty the brain is a
dungeon -- the mind a convict. The slave may bow and cringe and
crawl. but he cannot adore -- he cannot love.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               23

                           THE GHOSTS

     True religion is the perfume of a free and grateful heart.
True religion is a subordination of the passions to the perceptions
of the intellect. True religion is not a theory -- it is a
practice. It is not a creed -- it is a life.

     A theory that is afraid of investigation is undeserving a
place in the human mind.

     I do not pretend to tell what all the truth is. I do not
pretend to have fathomed the abyss, nor to have floated on
outstretched wings level with the dim heights of thought. I simply
plead for freedom. I denounce the cruelties and horrors of slavery.
I ask for light and air for the souls of men. I say, take off those
chains -- break those manacles -- free those limbs -- release that
brain! I plead for the right to think -- to reason -- to
investigate. I ask that the future may be enriched with the honest
thoughts of men. I implore every human being to be a soldier in the
army of progress.

     I will not invade the rights of others. You have no right to
erect your toll-gate upon the highways of thought. You have no
right to leap from the hedges of superstition and strike down the
pioneers of the human race. You have no right to sacrifice the
liberties of man upon the altars of ghosts. Believe what you may;
preach what you desire; have all the forms and ceremonies you
please; exercise your liberty in your own way but extend to all
others the same right.

     I will not attack your doctrines nor your creeds if they
accord liberty to me. If they hold thought to be dangerous -- if
they aver that doubt is a crime, then I attack them one and all,
because they enslave the minds of men.

     I attack the monsters, the phantoms of imagination that have
ruled the world. I attack slavery. I ask for room -- room for the
human mind.

     Why should we sacrifice a real world that we have, for one we
know not of? Why should we enslave ourselves? Why should we forge
fetters for our own hands? Why should we be the slaves of phantoms.
The darkness of barbarism was the womb of these shadows. In the
light of science they cannot cloud the sky forever. They have
reddened the hands of man with innocent blood. They made the cradle
a curse, and the grave a place of torment.

     They blinded the eyes and stopped the ears of the human race.
They subverted all ideas of justice by promising infinite rewards
for finite virtues, and threatening infinite punishment for finite
offenses.

     They filled the future with heavens and with hells, with the
shining peaks of selfish joy and the lurid abysses of flame. For
ages they kept the world in ignorance and awe, in want and misery,
in fear and chains.

     I plead for light, for air, for opportunity. I plead for
individual independence. I plead for the rights of labor and of 
thought. I plead for a chainless future. Let the ghosts go --

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               24

                           THE GHOSTS

justice remains. Let them disappear -- men and women and children
are left. Let the monsters fade away -- the world is here with its
hills and seas and plains, with its seasons of smiles and frowns,
its spring of leaf and bud, its summer of shade and flower and
murmuring stream; its autumn with the laden boughs, when the
withered banners of the corn are still, and gathered fields are
growing strangely wan; while death, poetic death, with hands that
color what they touch, weaves in the Autumn wood her tapestries of
gold and brown.

     The world remains with its winters and homes and firesides,
where grow and bloom the virtues of our race. All these are left;
and music, with its sad and thrilling voice, and all there is of
art and song and hope and love and aspiration high. All these
remain. Let the ghosts go -- we will worship them no more.

     Man is greater than these phantoms. Humanity is grander than
all the creeds, than all the books. Humanity is the great sea, and
these creeds, and books, and religions, are but the waves of a day.
Humanity is the sky, and these religions and dogmas and theories
are but the mists and clouds changing continually, destined finally
to melt away.

     That which is founded upon slavery, and fear and ignorance,
cannot endure. In the religion of the future there will be men and
women and children, all the aspirations of the soul, and all the
tender humanities of the heart.

     Let the ghosts go. We will worship them no more. Let them
cover their eyeless sockets with their fleshless hands and fade
forever from the imaginations of men.


                          ****     ****


    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.



   The Bank of Wisdom is a collection of the most thoughtful,
scholarly and factual books. These computer books are reprints of
suppressed books and will cover American and world history; the
Biographies and writings of famous persons, and especially of our
nations Founding Fathers. They will include philosophy and
religion. all these subjects, and more, will be made available to
the public in electronic form, easily copied and distributed, so
that America can again become what its Founders intended --

                 The Free Market-Place of Ideas.

   The Bank of Wisdom is always looking for more of these old,
hidden, suppressed and forgotten books that contain needed facts
and information for today. If you have such books please contact
us, we need to give them back to America.




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               25
