                        17 page printout.

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

                          ****     ****

          This file, its printout, or copies of either
          are to be copied and given away, but NOT sold.

          Bank of Wisdom, Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201

                The Works of ROBERT G. INGERSOLL

                          ****    ****

                      HERETICS AND HERESIES

                              1874

                  LIBERTY, A WORD WITHOUT WHICH
                       ALL WORDS ARE VAIN.

     WHOEVER has an opinion of his own, and honestly expresses it,
will be guilty of heresy. Heresy is what the minority believe; it
is the name given by the powerful to the doctrine of the weak. This
word was born of the hatred, arrogance and cruelty of those who
love their enemies, and who, when smitten on one cheek, turn the
other. This word was born of intellectual slavery in the feudal
ages of thought. It was an epithet used in the place of argument.
From the commencement of the Christian era, every art has been
exhausted and every conceivable punishment inflicted to force all
people to hold the same religious opinions. This effort was born of
the idea that a certain belief was necessary to the salvation of
the soul. Christ taught, and the church still teaches. that
unbelief is the blackest of crimes. God is supposed to hate with an
infinite and implacable hatred, every heretic upon the earth, and
the heretics who have died are supposed at this moment to be
suffering the agonies of the damned. The church persecutes the
living and her God burns, for all eternity, the dead.

     It is claimed that God wrote a book called the Bible, and it
is generally admitted that this book is somewhat difficult to
understand. As long as the church had all the copies of this book,
and the people were not allowed to read it, there was comparatively
little heresy in the world; but when it was printed and read,
people began honestly to differ as to its meaning. A few were
independent and brave enough to give the world their real thoughts,
and for the extermination of these men the church used all her
power. Protestants and Catholics vied with each other in the work
of enslaving the human mind. For ages they were rivals in the
infamous effort to rid the earth of honest people. They infested
every country, every city, town, hamlet and family. They appealed
to the worst passions of the human heart. They sowed the seeds of
discord and hatred in every land. Brother denounced brother, wives
informed against their husbands, mothers accused their children,
dungeons were crowded with the innocent; the flesh of the good and
true rotted in the clasp of chains; the flames devoured the heroic,
and in the name of the most merciful God, his children were
exterminated with famine, sword, and fire. Over the wild waves of
battle rose and fell the banner of Jesus Christ. for sixteen
hundred years the robes of the church were red with innocent blood.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                                1

                      HERETICS AND HERESIES

The ingenuity of Christians was exhausted in devising punishment
severe enough to be inflicted upon other Christians who honestly
and sincerely differed with them upon any point whatever.

     Give any orthodox church the power, and to-day they would
punish heresy with whip, and chain, and fire. As long as a church
deems a certain belief essential to salvation, just so long it will
kill and burn if it has the power. Why should the church pity a man
whom her God hates? Why should she show mercy to a kind and noble
heretic whom her God will burn in eternal fire? Why should a
Christian be better than his God? It is impossible for the
imagination to conceive of a greater atrocity than has been
perpetrated by the church. Every nerve in the human body capable of
pain has been sought out and touched.

     Let it be remembered that all churches have persecuted
heretics to the fullest extent of their power. Toleration has
increased only when and where the power of the church has
diminished. From Augustine until now the spirit of the Christians
has remained the same. There has been the same intolerance, the
same undying hatred of all who think for themselves, and the same
determination to crush out of the human brain all knowledge
inconsistent with an ignorant creed.

     Every church pretends that it has a revelation from God, and
that this revelation must be given to the people through the
church; that the church acts through its priests, and that ordinary
mortals must be content with a revelation -- not from God -- but
from the church. Had the people submitted to this preposterous
claim, of course there could have been but one church, and that
church never could have advanced. It might have retrograded,
because it is not necessary to think or investigate in order to
forget. Without heresy there could have been no progress.

     The highest type of the orthodox Christian does not forget;
neither does he learn. He neither advances nor recedes. He is a
living fossil embedded in that rock called faith. He makes no
effort to better his condition, because all his strength is
exhausted in keeping other people from improving theirs. The
supreme desire of his heart is to force all others to adopt his
creed, and in order to accomplish this object he denounces free
thinking as a crime, and this crime he calls heresy. When he had
power, heresy was the most terrible and formidable of words. It
meant confiscation, exile, imprisonment, torture, and death.

     In those days the cross and rack were inseparable companions.
Across the open Bible lay the sword and fagot. Not content with
burning such heretics as were alive, they even tried the dead, in
order that the church might rob their wives and children. The
property of all heretics was confiscated, and on this account they
charged the dead with being heretical -- indicted, as it were,
their dust -- to the end that the church might clutch the bread of
orphans. Learned divines discussed the propriety of tearing out the
tongues of heretics before they were burned, and the general
opinion was, that this ought to be done so that the heretics should
not be able, by uttering blasphemies, to shock the Christians who 



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                                2

                      HERETICS AND HERESIES

were burning them. With a mixture of ferocity and Christianity, the
priests insisted that heretics ought to be burned at a slow fire,
giving as a reason that more time was given them for repentance.

     No wonder that Jesus Christ said, "I came not to bring peace,
but a sword."

     Every priest regarded himself as the agent of God. He answered
all questions by authority, and to treat him with disrespect was an
insult offered to God. No one was asked to think, but all were
commanded to obey.

     In 1208 the Inquisition was established. Seven years
afterward, the fourth council of the Lateran enjoined all kings and
rulers to swear an oath that they would exterminate heretics from
their dominions. The sword of the church was unsheathed, and the
world was at the mercy of ignorant and infuriated priests, whose
eyes feasted upon the agonies they inflicted. Acting, as they
believed, or pretended to believe, under the command of God;
stimulated by the hope of infinite reward in another world --
hating heretics with every drop of their bestial blood; savage
beyond description; merciless beyond conception, -- these infamous
priests, in a kind of frenzied joy, leaped upon the helpless
victims of their rage. They crushed their bones in iron boots; tore
their quivering flesh with iron hooks and pincers; cut off their
lips and eyelids; pulled out their nails, and into the bleeding
quick thrust needles; tore out their tongues; extinguished their
eyes; stretched them upon racks; flayed them alive; crucified them
with their heads downward; exposed them to wild beasts; burned them
at the stake; mocked their cries and groans; robbed their children,
and then prayed God to finish the holy work in hell.

     Millions upon millions were sacrificed upon the altars of
bigotry. The Catholic burned the Lutheran, the Lutheran burned the
Catholic, the Episcopalian tortured the Presbyterian. the
Presbyterian tortured the Episcopalian. Every denomination killed
all it could of every other; and each Christian felt in duty bound
to exterminate every other Christian who denied the smallest
fraction of his creed.

     In the reign of Henry VIII. -- that pious and moral founder of
the apostolic Episcopal Church. -- there was passed by the
parliament of England an act entitled "An act for abolishing of
diversity of opinion." And in this act was set forth what a good
Christian was obliged to believe:

     First, That in the sacrament was the real body and blood of
Jesus Christ.

     Second, That the body and blood of Jesus Christ was in the
bread, and the blood and body of Jesus Christ was in the wine.

     Third, That priests should not marry.

     Fourth, That vows of chastity were of perpetual obligation.

     Fifth, That private masses ought to be continued; and,


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                                3

                      HERETICS AND HERESIES

     Sixth, That auricular confession to a priest must be
maintained.

     This creed was made by law, in order that all men might know
just what to believe by simply reading the statute. The church
hated to see the people wearing out their brains in thinking upon
these subjects. It was thought far better that a creed should be
made by parliament, so that whatever might be lacking in evidence
might be made up in force. The punishment for denying the first
article was death by fire. For the denial of any other article,
imprisonment, and for the second offence -- death.

     Your attention is called to these six articles, established
during the reign of Henry VIII., and by the Church of England,
simply because not one of these articles is believed by that church
to-day. If the law then made by the church could he enforced now,
every Episcopalian would be burned at the stake.

     Similar laws were passed in most Christian countries, as all
orthodox churches firmly believed that mankind could be legislated
into heaven. According to the creed of every church, slavery leads
to heaven, liberty leads to hell. It was claimed that God had
founded the church, and that to deny the authority of the church
was to be a traitor to God, and consequently an ally of the devil.
To torture and destroy one of the soldiers of Satan was a duty no
good Christian cared to neglect. Nothing can he sweeter than to
earn the gratitude of God by killing your own enemies. Such a
mingling of profit and revenge, of heaven for yourself and
damnation for those you dislike, is a temptation that your ordinary
Christian never resists.

     According to the theologians, God, the Father of us all, wrote
a letter to his children. The children have always differed
somewhat as to the meaning of this letter. In consequence of these
honest differences, these brothers began to cut out each other's
hearts. In every land, where this letter from God has been read,
the children to whom and for whom it was written have been filled
with hatred and malice. They have imprisoned and murdered each
other, and the wives and children of each other. In the name of God
every possible crime has been committed, every conceivable outrage
has been perpetrated. Brave men, tender and loving women, beautiful
girls, and prattling babes have been exterminated in the name of
Jesus Christ. For more than fifty generations the church has
carried the black flag. Her vengeance has been measured only by her
power. During all these years of infamy no heretic has ever been
forgiven. With the heart of a fiend she has hated; with the clutch
of avarice she has grasped; with the jaws of a dragon she has
devoured; pitiless as famine, merciless as fire, with the
conscience of a serpent: such is the history of the Church of God.

     I do not say, and I do not believe, that Christians are as bad
as their creeds. In spite of church and dogma, there have been
millions and millions of men and women true to the loftiest and
most generous promptings of the human heart. They have been true to
their convictions, and, with a self-denial and fortitude excelled
by none, have labored and suffered for the salvation of men. Imbued
with the spirit of self-sacrifice, believing that by personal 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                                4

                      HERETICS AND HERESIES

effort they could rescue at least a few souls from the infinite
shadow of hell, they have cheerfully endured every hardship and
scorned every danger. And yet, notwithstanding all this, they
believed that honest error was a crime. They knew that the Bible so
declared, and they believed that all unbelievers would be eternally
lost. They believed that religion was of God, and all heresy of the
devil. They killed heretics in defence of their own souls and the
souls of their children. They killed them because, according to
their idea, they were the enemies of God, and because the Bible
teaches that the blood of the unbeliever is a most acceptable
sacrifice to heaven.

     Nature never prompted a loving mother to throw her child into
the Ganges. Nature never prompted men to exterminate each other for
a difference of opinion concerning the baptism of infants. These
crimes have been produced by religions filled with all that is
illogical, cruel and hideous. These religions were produced for the
most part by ignorance, tyranny and hypocrisy. Under the impression
that the infinite ruler and creator of the universe had commanded
the destruction of heretics and infidels, the church perpetrated
all these crimes.

     Men and women have been burned for thinking there is but one
God; that there was none; that the Holy Ghost is younger than God;
that God was somewhat older than his son; for insisting that good
works will save a man without faith; that faith will do without
good works; for declaring that a sweet babe will not be burned
eternally, because its parents failed to have its head wet by a
priest; for speaking of God as though he had a nose; for denying
that Christ was his own father; for contending that three persons,
rightly added together, make more than one; for believing in
purgatory; for denying the reality of hell; for pretending that
priests can forgive sins; for preaching that God is an essence; for
denying that witches rode through the air on sticks; for doubting
the total depravity of the human heart; for laughing at
irresistible grace, predestination and particular redemption; for
denying that good bread could be made of the body of a dead man;
for pretending that the pope was not managing this world for God,
and in the place of God; for disputing the efficacy of a vicarious
atonement; for thinking the Virgin Mary was born like other people;
for thinking that a man's rib was hardly sufficient to make a good-
sized woman; for denying that God used his finger for a pen; for
asserting that prayers are not answered, that diseases are not sent
to punish unbelief; for denying the authority of the Bible; for
having a Bible in their possession; for attending mass, and for
refusing to attend; for wearing a surplice; for carrying a cross,
and for refusing; for being a Catholic, and for being a Protestant;
for being an Episcopalian, a Presbyterian, a Baptist, and for being
a Quaker. In short, every virtue has been a crime, and every crime
a virtue. The church has burned honesty and rewarded hypocrisy. And
all this, because it was commanded by a book -- a book that men had
been taught implicitly to believe, long before they knew one word
that was in it. They had been taught that to doubt the truth of
this book -- to examine it, even -- was a crime of such enormity
that it could not be forgiven, either in this world or in the next.




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                                5

                      HERETICS AND HERESIES

     The Bible was the real persecutor. The Bible burned heretics,
built dungeons, founded the Inquisition, and trampled upon all the
liberties of men.

     How long, O how long will mankind worship a book? How long
will they grovel in the dust before the ignorant legends of the
barbaric past? How long, O how long will they pursue phantoms in a
darkness deeper than death?

     Unfortunately for the world, about the beginning of the
sixteenth century, a man by the name of Gerard Chauvin was married
to Jeanne Lefranc, and still more unfortunately for the world, the
fruit of this marriage was a son, called John Chauvin, who
afterwards became famous as John Calvin, the founder of the
Presbyterian Church.

     This man forged five fetters for the brain. These fetters he
called points. That is to say, predestination, particular
redemption, total depravity, irresistible grace, and the
perseverance of the saints. About the neck of each follower he put
a collar bristling with these live iron points. The presence of all
these points on the collar is still the test of orthodoxy in the
church he founded. This man, when in the flush of youth, was
elected to the office of preacher in Geneva. He at once, in union
with Farel, drew up a condensed statement of the Presbyterian
doctrine, and all the citizens of Geneva, on pain of banishment,
were compelled to take an oath that they believed this statement.
Of this proceeding Calvin very innocently remarked that it produced
great satisfaction. A man named Caroli had the audacity to dispute
with Calvin. For this outrage he was banished.

     To show you what great subjects occupied the attention of
Calvin, it is only necessary to state that he furiously discussed
the question as to whether the sacramental bread should be leavened
or unleavened. He drew up laws regulating the cut of the citizens'
clothes, and prescribing their diet, and all those whose garments
were not in the Calvin fashion were refused the sacrament. At last,
the people becoming tired of this petty theological tyranny,
banished Calvin. In a few years, however, he was recalled and
received with great enthusiasm. After this he was supreme, and the
will of Calvin became the law of Geneva.

     Under his benign administration, James Gruet was beheaded
because he had written some profane verses. The slightest word
against Calvin or his absurd doctrines was punished as a crime.

     In 1553 a man was tried at Vienna by the Catholic Church for
heresy. He was convicted and sentenced to death by burning. It was
apparently his good fortune to escape. Pursued by the sleuth hounds
of intolerance he fled to Geneva for protection. A dove flying from
hawks, sought safety in the nest of a vulture. This fugitive from
the cruelty of Rome asked shelter from John Calvin, who had written
a book in favor of religious toleration. Serviettes had forgotten
that this book was written by Calvin when in the minority; that it
was written in weakness to be forgotten in power; that it was
produced by fear instead of principle. He did not know that Calvin
had caused his arrest at Vienna, in France, and had sent a copy of 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                                6

                      HERETICS AND HERESIES

his work, which was claimed to be blasphemous, to the archbishop.
He did not then know that the Protestant Calvin was acting as one
of the detectives of the Catholic Church, and had been instrumental
in procuring his conviction for heresy. Ignorant of all this
unspeakable infamy, he put himself in the power of this very
Calvin. The maker of the Presbyterian creed caused the fugitive
Serviettes to be arrested for blasphemy. He was tried. Calvin was
his accuser. He was convicted and condemned to death by fire. On
the morning of the fatal day, Calvin saw him, and Serviettes, the
victim, asked forgiveness of Calvin, the murderer. Serviettes was
bound to the stake, and the fagots were lighted. The wind carried
the flames somewhat away from his body, so that he slowly roasted
for hours. Vainly he implored a speedy death. At last the flames
climbed round his form; through smoke and fire his murderers saw a
white heroic face. And there they watched until a man became a
charred and shriveled mass.

     Liberty was banished from Geneva, and nothing but
Presbyterianism was left. Honor, justice, mercy, reason and charity
were all exiled; but the five points of predestination, particular
redemption, irresistible grace, total depravity, and the certain
perseverance of the saints remained instead.

     Calvin founded a little theocracy, modeled after the Old
Testament, and succeeded in erecting the most detestable government
that ever existed, except the one from which it was copied.

     Against all this intolerance, one man, a minister, raised his
voice. The name of this man should never be forgotten. It was
Castalio. This brave man had the goodness and the courage to
declare the innocence of honest error. He was the first of the so-
called reformers to take this noble ground. I wish I had the genius
to pay a fitting tribute to his memory. Perhaps it would be
impossible to pay him a grander compliment than to say. Castalio
was in all things the opposite of Calvin. To plead for the right of
individual judgment was considered a crime, and Castalio was driven
from Geneva by John Calvin. By him he was denounced as a child of
the devil, as a dog of Satan, as a beast from hell, and as one who,
by this horrid blasphemy of the innocence of honest error,
crucified Christ afresh, and by him he was pursued until rescued by
the hand of death.

     Upon the name of Castalio, Calvin heaped every epithet, until
his malice was nearly satisfied and his imagination entirely
exhausted. It is impossible to conceive how human nature can become
so frightfully perverted as to pursue a fellow-man with the
malignity of a fiend, simply because he is good, just, and
generous.

     Calvin was of a pallid, bloodless complexion, thin, sickly,
irritable, gloomy, impatient, egotistic, tyrannical, heartless, and
infamous. He was a strange compound of revengeful morality,
malicious forgiveness, ferocious charity, egotistic humility, and
a kind of hellish justice. In other words. he was as near like the
God of the Old Testament as his health permitted. The best thing,
however, about the Presbyterians of Geneva was, that they denied
the power of the Pope, and the best thing about the Pope was, that 
he was not a Presbyterian.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                                7

                      HERETICS AND HERESIES

     The doctrines of Calvin spread rapidly, and were eagerly
accepted by multitudes on the continent; but Scotland, in a few
years, became the real fortress of Presbyterianism. The Scotch
succeeded in establishing the same kind of theocracy that
flourished in Geneva. The clergy took possession and control of
everybody and everything. It is impossible to exaggerate the mental
degradation, the abject superstition of the people of Scotland
during the reign of Presbyterianism. Heretics were hunted and
devoured as though they had been wild beasts. The gloomy insanity
of Presbyterianism took possession of a great majority of the
people. They regarded their ministers as the Jews did Moses and
Aaron. They believed that they were the especial agents of God, and
that whatsoever they bound in Scotland would be bound in heaven.
There was not one particle of intellectual freedom. No man was
allowed to differ with the church, or to even contradict a priest.
Had Presbyterianism maintained its ascendancy, Scotland would have
been peopled by savages to-day.

     The revengeful spirit of Calvin took possession of the
Puritans, and caused them to redden the soil of the New World with
the brave blood of honest men. Clinging to the five points of
Calvin, they too established governments in accordance with the
teachings of the Old Testament. They too attached the penalty of
death to the expression of honest thought. They too believed their
church supreme, and exerted all their power to curse this continent
with a spiritual despotism as infamous as it was absurd. They
believed with Luther that universal toleration is universal error,
and universal error is universal hell. Toleration was denounced as
a crime.

     Fortunately for us, civilization has had a softening effect
even upon the Presbyterian Church. To the ennobling influence of
the arts and sciences the savage spirit of Calvinism has, in some
slight degree, succumbed. True, the old creed remains substantially
as it was written, but by a kind of tacit understanding it has come
to be regarded as a relic of the past. The cry of "heresy" has been
growing fainter and fainter, and, as a consequence, the ministers
of that denomination have ventured, now and then, to express doubts
as to the damnation of infants, and the doctrine of total
depravity. The fact is, the old ideas became a little monotonous to
the people. The fall of man, the scheme of redemption and
irresistible grace, began to have a familiar sound. The preachers
told the old stories while the congregations slept. Some of the
ministers became tired of these stories themselves. The five points
grew dull, and they felt that nothing short of irresistible grace
could bear this endless repetition. The outside world was full of
progress, and in every direction men advanced, while this church,
anchored to a creed, idly rotted at the shore. Other denominations,
imbued some little with the spirit of investigation, were springing
up on every side, while the old Presbyterian ark rested on the
Ararat of the past, filled with the theological monsters of another
age.

     Lured by the splendors of the outer world, tempted by the
achievements of science, longing to feel the throb and heat of the
mighty march of the human race, a few of the ministers of this
conservative denomination were compelled, by irresistible sense, to
say a few words in harmony with the splendid ideas of to-day.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                                8

                      HERETICS AND HERESIES

     These utterances have upon several occasions so nearly wakened
some of the members that, rubbing their eyes, they have feebly
inquired whether these grand ideas were not somewhat heretical.
These ministers found that just in the proportion that their
orthodoxy decreased, their congregations increased. Those who dealt
in the pure unadulterated article found themselves demonstrating
the five points to a less number of hearers than they had points.
Stung to madness by this bitter truth this galling contrast, this
harassing fact, the really orthodox have raised the cry of heresy,
and expect with this cry to seal the lips of honest men. One of the
Presbyterian ministers, and one who has been enjoying the luxury of
a little honest thought, and the real rapture of expressing it, has
already been indicted, and is about to be tried by the Presbyter of
Illinois. He is charged -- 

     First, With having neglected to preach that most comforting
and consoling truth, the eternal damnation of the soul.

     Surely, that man must be a monster who could wish to blot this
blessed doctrine out and rob earth's wretched children of this
blissful hope!

     Who can estimate the misery that has been caused by this most
infamous doctrine of eternal punishment? Think of the lives it has
blighted, of the tears it has caused -- of the agony it has
produced. Think of the millions who have been driven to insanity by
this most terrible of dogmas. This doctrine renders God the basest
and most cruel being in the universe. Compared with him, the most
frightful deities of the most barbarous and degraded tribes are
miracles of goodness and mercy. There is nothing more degrading
than to worship such a god. Lower than this the soul can never
sink. If the doctrine of eternal damnation is true, let me share
the fate of the unconverted; let me have my portion in hell, rather
than in heaven with a god infamous enough to inflict eternal misery
upon any of the sons of men.

     Second. With having spoken a few kind words of Robert Collyer
and John Stuart Mill.

     I have the honor of a slight acquaintance with Robert Collyer.
I have read with pleasure some of his exquisite productions. He has
a brain full of the dawn, the head of a philosopher, the
imagination of a poet and the sincere heart of a child.

     Is a minister to be silenced because he speaks fairly of a
noble and candid adversary? Is it a crime to compliment a lover of
justice, an advocate of liberty; one who devotes his life to the
elevation of man, the discovery of truth, and the promulgation of
what he believes to be right?

     Can that tongue be palsied by a presbyter that praises a self-
denying and heroic life? Is it a sin to speak a charitable word
over the grave of John Stuart Mill? Is it heretical to pay a just
and graceful tribute to departed worth? Must the true Presbyterian
violate the sanctity of the tomb, dig open the grave and ask his
God to curse the silent dust? Is Presbyterianism so narrow that it
conceives of no excellence, of no purity of intention, of no 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                                9

                      HERETICS AND HERESIES

spiritual and moral grandeur outside of its barbaric creed? Does it
still retain within its stony heart all the malice of its founder?
Is it still warming its fleshless hands at the flames that consumed
Serviettes? Does it still glory in the damnation of infants, and
does it still persist in emptying the cradle in order that
perdition may be filled? Is it still starving the soul and
famishing the heart? Is it still trembling and shivering, crouching
and crawling before its ignorant Confession of Faith?

     Had such men as Robert Collyer and John Stuart Mill been
present at the burning of Serviettes, they would have extinguished
the flames with their tears. Had the presbyter of Chicago been
there, they would have quietly turned their backs, solemnly divided
their coat tails, and warmed themselves.

     Third. With having spoken disparagingly of the doctrine of
predestination.

     If there is any dogma that ought to be protected by law,
predestination is that doctrine, Surely it is a cheerful, joyous
thing, to one who is laboring, struggling, and suffering in this
weary world, to think that before he existed; before the earth was;
before a star had glittered in the heavens; before a ray of light
had left the quiver of the sun, his destiny had been irrevocably
fixed, and that for an eternity before his birth he had been doomed
to bear eternal pain.

     Fourth. With failing to preach the efficacy of a "vicarious
sacrifice."

     Suppose a man had been convicted of murder, and was about to
be hanged -- the governor acting as the executioner; and suppose
that just as the doomed man was about to suffer death some one in
the crowd should step forward and say, "I am willing to die in the
place of that murderer. He has a family, and I have none." And
suppose further, that the governor should reply, "Come forward,
young man, your offer is accepted. A murder has been committed and
somebody must be hung, and your death will satisfy the law just as
well as the death of the murderer." What would you then think of
the doctrine of "vicarious sacrifice"?

     This doctrine is the consummation of two outrages -- forgiving
one crime and committing another.

     Fifth. With having inculcated a phase of the doctrine commonly
known as "evolution," or "development."

     The church believes and teaches the exact opposite of this
doctrine. According to the philosophy of theology, man has
continued to degenerate for six thousand years. To teach that there
is that in nature which impels to higher forms and grander ends, is
heresy, of course. The Deity will damn Spencer and his "Evolution,"
Darwin and his "Origin of Species," Huxley and his "Protoplasm,"
Tyndall and his "Prayer Gauge," and will save those, and those
only, who declare that the universe has been cursed, from the
smallest atom to the grandest star; that everything tends to evil
and to that only, and that the only perfect thing in nature is the 
Presbyterian Confession of Faith.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               10

                      HERETICS AND HERESIES

     Sixth. With having intimated that the reception of Socrates
and Penelope at heaven's gate was, to say the least, a trifle more
cordial than that of Catharine II. Penelope, waiting patiently and
trustfully for Her lord's return, delaying her suitors, while sadly
weaving and unweaving the shroud of Laertes, is the most perfect
type of wife and woman produced by the civilization of Greece.

     Socrates, whose life was above reproach and whose death was
beyond all praise, stands to-day, in the estimation of every
thoughtful man, at least the peer of Christ.

     Catharine II. assassinated her husband. Stepping upon his
corpse, she mounted the throne. She was the murderess of Prince
Iwan, grand nephew of Peter the Great, who was imprisoned for
eighteen years, and who during all that time saw the sky but once.
Taken all in all, Catharine was probably one of the most
intellectual beasts that ever wore a crown.

     Catharine, however, was the head of the Greek Church, Socrates
was a heretic and Penelope lived and died without having once heard
of "particular redemption" or of "irresistible grace."

     Seventh. With repudiating the idea of a "call" to the
ministry, and pretending that men were "called" to preach as they
were to the other avocations of life.

     If this doctrine is true, God, to say the least of it, is an
exceedingly poor judge of human nature. It is more than a century
since a man of true genius has been found in an orthodox pulpit.
Every minister is heretical just to the extent that his intellect
is above the average. The Lord seems to be satisfied with
mediocrity; but the people are not.

     An old deacon, wishing to get rid of an unpopular preacher,
advised him to give up the ministry and turn his attention to
something else. The preacher replied that he could not
conscientiously desert the pulpit, as he had a "call" to the
ministry. To which the deacon replied, "That may be so, but it's
very unfortunate for you, that when God called you to preach, he
forgot to call anybody to hear you."

     There is nothing more stupidly egotistic than the claim of the
clergy that they are, in some divine sense set apart to the service
of the Lord; that they have been chosen, and sanctified; that there
is an infinite difference between them and persons employed in
secular affairs. They teach us that all other professions must take
care of themselves; that God allows anybody to be a doctor, a
lawyer, statesman, soldier, or artist; that the Motts and Coopers
-- the Mansfields and Marshalls -- the Wilberforces and Sumners --
the Angelos and Raphaels, were never honored by a "call." They
chose their professions and won their laurels without the
assistance of the Lord. All these men were left free to follow
their own inclinations, while God was busily engaged selecting and
"calling" priests, rectors, elders, ministers and exhorters.

     Eight. With having doubted that God was the author of the
109th Psalm.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               11

                      HERETICS AND HERESIES

     The portion of that psalm which carries with it the clearest
and most satisfactory evidences of inspiration, and which has
afforded almost unspeakable consolation to the Presbyterian Church,
is as follows:

     Set thou a wicked man over him; and let Satan stand at his
right hand.

     When he shall be judged, let him be condemned; and let his
prayer become sin.

     Let his days be few; and let another take his office.

     Let his children be fatherless and his wife a widow.

     Let his children be continually vagabonds, and beg; let them
seek their bread also out of their desolate places.

     Let the extortioner catch all that he hath; and let the
stranger spoil his labor.

     Let there be none to extend mercy unto him; neither let there
be any to favor his fatherless children.

     Let his posterity be cut off: and in the generation following
let there name be blotted out.

     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *    

     But do thou for me, O God the Lord, for Thy name's sake;
because; Thy mercy is good, deliver Thou me. * * I will greatly
praise the Lord with my mouth.

     Think of a God wicked and malicious enough to inspire this
prayer. Think of one infamous enough to answer it.

     Had this inspired psalm been found in some temple erected for
the worship of snakes, or in the possession of some cannibal king,
written with blood upon the dried skins of babes, there would have
been a perfect harmony between its surroundings and its sentiments.

     No wonder that the author of this inspired psalm coldly
received Socrates and Penelope, and reserved his sweetest smiles
for Catharine the Second.

     Ninth. With having said that the battles in which the
Israelites engaged, with the approval and command of Jehovah,
surpassed in cruelty those of Julius Caesar.

     Was it Julius Caesar who said, "And the Lord our God delivered
him before us; and we smote him, and his sons, and all his people.
And we took all his cities, and utter!y destroyed the men, and the
women, and the little ones, of every city, we left none to remain"?

     Did Julius Caesar send the following report to the Roman
senate? "And we took all his cities at that time, there was not a
city which we took not from them, three-score cities, all the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               12

                      HERETICS AND HERESIES

region of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan. All these cities were
fenced with high walls, gates, and Bars; beside unwalled towns a
great many. And we utterly destroyed them, as we did unto Sihon,
king of Heshbon, utterly destroying the men, women, and children of
every city."

     Did Caesar take the city of Jericho "and utterly destroy all
that was in the city, both men and women, young and old"? Did he
smite "all the country of the hills, and of the south, and of the
vale, and of the springs, and all their kings, and leave none
remaining that breathed, as the Lord God had commanded"?

     Search the records of the whole world, find out the history of
every barbarous tribe, and you can find no crime that touched a
lower depth of infamy than those the Bible's God commanded and
approved. For such a God I have no words to express my loathing and
contempt, and all the words in all the languages of man would
scarcely be sufficient. Away with such a God! Give me Jupiter
rather, with Io and Europa, or even Siva with his skulls and
snakes.

     Tenth. With having repudiated the doctrine of "total
depravity."

     What a precious doctrine is that of the total depravity of the
human heart! How sweet it is to believe that the lives of all the
good and great were continual sins and perpetual crimes; that the
love a mother bears her child is, in the sight of God, a sin; that
the gratitude of the natural heart is simple meanness; that the
tears of pity are impure; that for the unconverted to live and
labor for others is an offence to heaven; that the noblest
aspirations of the soul are low and groveling in the sight of God;
that man should fall upon his knees and ask forgiveness, simply for
loving his wife and child, and that even the act of asking
forgiveness is in fact a crime!

     Surely it is a kind of bliss to feel that every woman and
child in the wide world, with the exception of those who believe
the five points, or some other equally cruel creed, and such
children as have been baptized, ought at this very moment to be
dashed down to the lowest glowing gulf of hell.

     Take from the Christian the history of his own church -- leave
that entirely out of the question -- and he has no argument left
with which to substantiate the total depravity of man.

     Eleventh. With having doubted the "perseverance of the
saints."

     I suppose the real meaning of this doctrine is, that
Presbyterians are just as sure of going to heaven as all other
folks are of going to hell. The real idea being, that it all
depends upon the will of God, and not upon the character of the
person to be damned or saved; that God has the weakness to send
Presbyterians to Paradise. and the justice to doom the rest of
mankind to eternal fire.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               13

                      HERETICS AND HERESIES

     It is admitted that no unconverted brain can see the least
particle of sense in this doctrine; that it is abhorrent to all who
have not been the recipients of a "new heart;" that only the
perfectly good can justify the perfectly infamous.

     It is contended that the saints do not persevere of their own
free will -- that they are entitled to no credit for persevering;
but that God forces them to persevere, while on the other hand,
every crime is committed in accordance with the secret will of God,
who does all things for his own glory.

     Compared with this doctrine, there is no other idea, that has
ever been believed by man, that can properly be called absurd.

     Twelfth. With having spoken and written somewhat lightly of
the idea of converting the heathen with doctrinal sermons.

     Of all the failures of which we have any history or knowledge,
the missionary effort is the most conspicuous. The whole question
has been decided here, in our own country, and conclusively
settled, We have nearly exterminated the Indians, but we have
converted none. From the days of John Eliot to the execution of the
last Modoc, not one Indian has been the subject of irresistible
grace or particular redemption. The few red men who roam the
western wilderness have no thought or care concerning the five
points of Calvin. They are utterly oblivious to the great and vital
truths contained in the Thirty-nine Articles, the Saybrook
platform, and the resolutions of the Evangelical Alliance. No
Indian has ever scalped another on account of his religious belief.
This of itself shows conclusively that the missionaries have had no
effect.

     Why should we convert the heathen of China and kill our own?
Why should we send missionaries across the seas, and soldiers over
the plains? Why should we send Bibles to the east and muskets to
the west? If it is impossible to convert Indians who have no
religion of their own; no prejudice for or against the "eternal
procession of the Holy Ghost," how can we expect to convert a
heathen who has a religion; who has plenty of gods and Bibles and
prophets and Christs, and who has a religious literature far
grander than our own? Can we hope with the story of Daniel in the
lions' den to rival the stupendous miracles of India? Is there
anything in our Bible as lofty and loving as the prayer of the
Buddhist? Compare your "Confession of Faith" with the following:
"Never will I seek nor receive private individual salvation --
never enter into final peace alone; but forever and everywhere will
I live and strive for the universal redemption of every creature
throughout all worlds. Until all are delivered, never will I leave
the world of sin, sorrow, and struggle, but will remain where I
am."

     Think of sending an average Presbyterian to convert a man who
daily offers this tender, this infinitely generous, this
incomparable prayer. Think of reading the 109th Psalm to a heathen
who has a Bible of his own in which is found this passage. "Blessed
is that man and beloved of all the gods, who is afraid of no man,
and of whom no man is afraid."


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               14

                      HERETICS AND HERESIES

     Why should you read even the New Testament to a Hindu, when
his own Chrishna has said, "If a man strike thee, and in striking
drop his staff, pick it up and hand it to him again"? Why send a
Presbyterian to a Sufi, who says, "Better one moment of silent
contemplation and inward love, than seventy thousand years of
outward worship? "Who would carelessly tread one worm that crawls
on earth, that heartless one is darkly alienated from God; but he
that, living, embraceth all things in his love, to live with him
God bursts all bounds above, below."

     Compare this prayer with the curses and cruelties of the Old
Testament -- with the infamies commanded and approved by the being
whom we are taught to worship as a God -- and with the following
tender product of Presbyterianism: "It may seem absurd to human
wisdom that God should harden, blind, and deliver up some men to a
reprobate sense; that he should first deliver them over to evil,
and then condemn them for that evil; but the believing spiritual
man sees no absurdity in all this, knowing that God would be never
a whit less good even though he should destroy all men."

     Of all the religions that have been produced by the egotism,
the malice, the ignorance and ambition of man, Presbyterianism is
the most hideous.

     But what shall I say more, for the time would fail me to tell
of Sabellianism, of a "Modal Trinity," and the "Eternal Procession
of the Holy Ghost"?

     Upon these charges, a minister is to be tried, here in
Chicago; in this city of pluck and progress -- this marvel of
energy -- this miracle of nerve. The cry of "heresy," here, sounds
like a wail from the Dark Ages -- a shriek from the Inquisition, or
a groan from the grave of Calvin.

     Another effort is being made to enslave a man.

     It is claimed that every member of the church has solemnly
agreed never to outgrow the creed; that he has pledged himself to
remain an intellectual dwarf. Upon this condition the church agrees
to save his soul, and he hands over his brains to bind the bargain.
Should a fact be found inconsistent with the creed, he binds
himself to deny the fact and curse the finder. With scraps of
dogmas and crumbs of doctrine, he agrees that his soul shall be
satisfied forever. What an intellectual feast the Confession of
Faith must be! It reminds one of the dinner described by Sydney
Smith, where everything was cold except the water, and everything
sour except the vinegar.

     Every member of a church promises to remain orthodox, that is
to say -- stationary. Growth is heresy. Orthodox ideas are the
feathers that have been molted by the eagle of progress. They are
the dead leaves under the majestic palm, while heresy is the bud
and blossom at the top.

     Imagine a vine that grows at one end and decays at the other.
The end that grows is heresy, the end that rots is orthodox. The
dead are orthodox, and your cemetery is the most perfect type of a 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               15

                      HERETICS AND HERESIES

well regulated church. No thought, no progress, no heresy there.
Slowly and silently, side by side, the satisfied members peacefully
decay. There is only this difference -- the dead do not persecute.

     And what does a trial for heresy mean? It means that the
church says to a heretic, "Believe as I do, or I will withdraw my
support. I will not employ you. I will pursue you until your
garments are rags; until your children cry for bread; until your
cheeks are furrowed with tears. I will hunt you to the very portals
of the tomb, and then my God will do the rest. I will not imprison
you. I will not burn you. The law prevents my doing that. I helped
make the law, not however to protect you, nor to deprive me of the
right to exterminate you, but in order to keep other churches from
exterminating me."

     A trial for heresy means that the spirit of persecution still
lingers in the church; that it still denies the right of private
judgement; that it still thinks more of creed than truth, and that
it is still determined to prevent the intellectual growth of man.
It means that churches are shambles in which are bought and sold
the souls of men. It means that the church is still guilty of the
barbarity of opposing thought with force. It means that if it had
the power, the mental horizon would be bounded by a creed; that it
would bring again the whips and chains and dungeon keys, the rack
and fagot of the past.

     But let me tell the church it lacks the power. There have
been, and still are, too many men who own themselves -- too much
thought, too much knowledge for the church to grasp again the sword
of power. The church must abdicate. For the Eglon of superstition
Science has a message from Truth.

     The heretics have not thought and suffered and died in vain.
Every heretic has been, and is, a ray of light. Not in vain did
Voltaire, that great man, point from the foot of the Alps the
finger of scorn at every hypocrite in Europe. Not in vain were the
splendid utterances of the infidels, while beyond all price are the
discoveries of science.

     The church has impeded, but it has not and it cannot stop the
onward march of the human race. Heresy cannot be burned, nor
imprisoned, nor starved. It laughs at presbyters and synods, at
ecumenical councils and the impotent thunders of Sinai. Heresy is
the eternal dawn, the morning star, the glittering herald of the
day. Heresy is the last and best thought. It is the perpetual New
World, the unknown sea, toward which the brave all sail. It is the
eternal horizon of progress.

     Heresy extends the hospitalities of the brain to a new
thought.

     Heresy is a cradle; orthodoxy, a coffin.

     Why should man be afraid to think, and why should he fear to
express his thoughts?




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               16

                      HERETICS AND HERESIES

     Is it possible that an infinite Deity is unwilling that a man
should investigate the phenomena by which he is surrounded? Is it
possible that a god delights in threatening and terrifying men?
What glory, what honor and renown a god must win on such a field!
The ocean raving at a drop; a star envious of a candle; the sun
jealous of a fire-fly.

     Go on, presbyters and synods, go on! Thrust the heretics out
of the church -- that is to say, throw away your brains, -- put out
your eyes. The infidels will thank you. They are willing to adopt
your exiles. Every deserter from your camp is a recruit for the
army of progress. Cling to the ignorant dogmas of the past; read
the 109th Psalm; gloat over the slaughter of mothers and babes;
thank God for total depravity; shower your honors upon hypocrites,
and silence every minister who is touched with that heresy called
genius.

     Be true to your history. Turn out the astronomers, the
geologists, the naturalists, the chemists, and all the honest
scientists. With a whip of scorpions, drive them all out. We want
them all. Keep the ignorant, the superstitious, the bigoted, and
the writers of charges and specifications. Keep them, and keep them
all. Repeat your pious platitudes in the drowsy ears of the
faithful, and read your Bible to heretics, as kings read some
forgotten riot-act to stop and stay the waves of revolution. You
are too weak to excite anger. We forgive your efforts as the sun
forgives a cloud -- as the air forgives the breath you waste.

     How long, O how long, will man listen to the threats of God,
and shut his eyes to the splendid possibilities of Nature? How
long, O how long will man remain the cringing slave of a false and
cruel creed?

     By this time the whole world should know that the real Bible
has not yet been written, but is being written, and that it will
never be finished until the race begins its downward march, or
ceases to exist.

     The real Bible is not the work of inspired men, nor prophets,
nor apostles, nor evangelists, nor of Christs. Every man who finds
a fact, adds, as it were, a word to this great book. It is not
attested by prophecy, by miracles or signs. It makes no appeal to
faith, to ignorance, to credulity or fear. It has no punishment for
unbelief, and no reward for hypocrisy. It appeals to man in the
name of demonstration. It has nothing to conceal. It has no fear of
being read, of being contradicted, of being investigated and
understood. It does not pretend to be holy, or sacred; it simply
claims to be true. It challenges the scrutiny of all, and implores
every reader to verify every line for himself. It is incapable of
being blasphemed. This book appeals to all the surroundings of man.
Each thing that exists testifies of its perfection. The earth, with
its heart of fire and crowns of snow; with its forests and plains,
its rocks and seas; with its every wave and cloud; with its every
leaf and bud and flower, confirms its every word, and the solemn
stars, shining in the infinite abysses, are the eternal witnesses
of its truth.
                          ****     ****
    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               17
