                   MouseWrite MINI-REFERENCE MANUAL

This MouseWrite Mini-Reference Manual is provided to give you step by
step instructions for most, but not all of the MouseWrite procedures.
Those features not covered (Saving and Printing) are not available on
the MouseWrite Demonstration diskette.

The format is divided into three sections:

         1) Each new procedure is CENTERED on the page

         2) Each step within the procedure is in UPPER CASE

         3) How to do each step is in Upper/Lower case

Remember, although this is not a tutorial, you can refer to this guide
for information on how to accomplish MouseWrite's major features. We
hope this helps you further enjoy MouseWrite and your Apple. 
                SUMMARY OF MOUSE TECHNIQUES

TO CLICK.

Position the Mouse pointer on what you want to select or activate.
Click the Mouse button and quickly release it.

TO PRESS.

Position the Mouse pointer on what you want to press on. Press and
hold down the mouse button.

The effects of pressing remain in effect until you release the mouse
button, or until you reach the limit of the feature you are using. For
example, the effects of pressing on an arrow in a scroll bar stop when
the window displays the top (or bottom) of the document.

TO DRAG.

Position the Mouse pointer on something. Press and hold down the mouse
button and then move the mouse. Release the mouse button when dragging
is completed.

You can cancel a drag by moving the mouse back to the position the
drag started at, or if in a menu by moving off of the menu.

TO APPLE-CLICK.

Make a selection of text, or simply click.

Hold down either Apple key and click where you want the selection to
end (or to begin if selecting backwards).

The scroll bars and/or move commands may be used to move to the end of
the selection if the window does not display the desired end of the
selection.

                         SCROLLING

ONE LINE UP OR DOWN.

Use the arrow keys located on the keyboard to scroll up or down one
line.

You can also click on the appropriate arrow at the top or bottom of
the scroll bar.

Continuously line by line.

Hold down the arrow keys located on the keyboard to scroll
continuously.

You can also press on the appropriate arrow at the top or bottom of
the scroll bar.

TO SCROLL BY THE WINDOWFUL.

Click in the shaded area above or below the scroll box in the scroll
bar.

BEGINNING OR END OF DOCUMENT.

Choose Move to Beginning (or Move to End) from the Move menu.

You may also drag the scroll box to the top or bottom of the scroll
 bar.
 
ANY PART OF A LONG DOCUMENT.

Drag the scroll box to the place in the scroll bar that approximates
the location of the text in the document.

Think of the scroll bar as representing the entire length of the
document. If you want to see the middle of the document, drag the
scroll box to the middle of the scroll bar.

SIDEWAYS SCROLLING.

Click on the right or left arrows on the horizontal scroll bar at the
bottom of the window. If the entire document width is displayed in the
window, this will have no effect.

To continuously scroll sideways, press on the right or left arrow.









                 INSERTING AND OVERSTRIKING

TO INSERT TEXT.

Select an insertion point. Choose the Insert Cursor (the blinking
vertical bar) from the Edit menu, and type.

TO INSERT A BLANK LINE

Select an insertion point.

If at the beginning or end of a paragraph, press Return once.

If in the middle of a line, press Return twice, once to end the
current paragraph, once to insert a blank line.

USING OVERSTRIKE TO REPLACE

Select an insertion point. Choose the Overstrike cursor (the blinking
horizontal bar) from the Edit menu and type.

The typed text will replace (overstrike) the existing text.

                         SELECTING

TO SELECT AN INSERTION POINT.

Click where you want to insert or overstrike text, or Paste something.


TO SELECT TEXT.

Drag from the beginning to the end of the text.

If you drag beyond the top or bottom of the window, the text will
scroll within the window while it is being selected. If the document
is wider than the window, dragging beyond the sides of the window will
scroll text while it is being selected.

TO SELECT LARGE PORTIONS OF TEXT.

Click at one end of the text to be selected.

Move to the other end, using the Move menu or the scroll bars if
required.

Hold down either Apple key and click on, or drag to the end of the
selection.







TO EXTEND OR SHORTEN A COMPLETED SELECTION.

Hold down either Apple key and click on, or drag to the new end of the
selection.

Think of an Apple-click as a continuation of a previously completed
drag (or selection).

                         REMOVING

TO REMOVE WITH CUT.

Select what's to be removed.

Choose Cut from the Edit menu. MouseWrite will place the Cut text on
the clipboard. It will remain there until another Cut or a Copy is
performed. Text on the clipboard may be Pasted anywhere in a document.


TO REMOVE WITH THE DELETE KEY.

Select an insertion point. Press the Delete key.

If using the Insert Cursor, the text to the right of the insertion
point will be moved to the left, into the space removed by Delete
(destructive backspace).

If using the Overstrike cursor, the text to the right of the insertion
point will remain where it was (non-destructive backspace and delete).


TO REMOVE A WORD.

Select an insertion point.

Choose Delete Next Word from the edit menu.

TO REMOVE A RETURN CHARACTER.

Select the insertion point at the beginning of the line below the
Return to be removed.

Press the Delete key.












         MOVING OR COPYING TEXT WITHIN A DOCUMENT

SELECT WHAT'S TO BE MOVED OR COPIED.

CHOOSE CUT OR COPY FROM THE EDIT MENU.

SELECT A NEW INSERTION POINT WHERE YOU WANT THE CONTENTS OF THE
CLIPBOARD PUT.

CHOOSE PASTE FROM THE EDIT MENU.

A copy of the contents of the clipboard will be inserted at the
insertion point. The clipboard will retain a copy of the text also,
allowing selection of another insertion point and another Paste.

    MOVING OR COPYING TEXT BETWEEN MouseWrite DOCUMENTS

SELECT WHAT'S TO BE MOVED OR COPIED.

CHOOSE CUT OR COPY FROM THE EDIT MENU.

CLOSE THE CURRENT DOCUMENT WINDOW (SAVING IT FIRST IF DESIRED). 

OPEN THE DOCUMENT YOU WISH TO PASTE INTO, OR OPEN A NEW DOCUMENT.

Select the insertion point where the text on the clipboard is to be
Pasted.

CHOOSE PASTE FROM THE EDIT MENU.

The clipboard will retain a copy of the text also, allowing selection
of another insertion point and another Paste.

                       FINDING TEXT

SELECT AN INSERTION POINT WHERE YOU WANT TO START FINDING TEXT .

CHOOSE FIND/REPLACE FROM THE FIND MENU.

The Find/Replace window will open on the desktop.

AFTER "FIND:", TYPE THE CHARACTERS YOU WANT MouseWrite TO FIND .

You may enter up to 30 characters, even Styles from the Style menu.

 CLICK THE "FIND NEXT" BUTTON.

The first occurrence of the text will be found and selected. If
MouseWrite can't find the specified characters, it will beep. To find
more occurrences of the specified characters, Click the "FIND NEXT"
button again. The text that is found is selected, just as if it were
selected by dragging the mouse.

CLICK THE "CANCEL" BUTTON TO REMOVE THE FIND/REPLACE WINDOW FROM THE
DESKTOP.

                FINDING AND REPLACING TEXT

SELECT AN INSERTION POINT WHERE YOU WANT TO START FINDING TEXT.

CHOOSE FIND/REPLACE FROM THE FIND MENU.

The Find/Replace window will be opened on the desktop.

AFTER "FIND:", TYPE THE CHARACTERS YOU WANT MouseWrite TO FIND.

You may enter up to 30 characters, including Styles from the Style
menu. Click to the right of "REPLACE:" (or press the TAB key) and type
the characters you want MouseWrite to replace with. 

CLICK THE "FIND NEXT" BUTTON.

You can then Click the "REPLACE THEN FIND" button to replace the
selected text, the next occurrence of the text will then be found.

TO REPLACE EVERY OCCURRENCE IN THE DOCUMENT.

Click the "REPLACE ALL" button.

CLICK THE "CANCEL" BUTTON WHEN DONE.


                         ZOOMING IN AND OUT

SELECT ZOOM IN FROM THE PAGE MENU

This command will turn all of the Style characters in the document
into highlighted letters which indicate the styles they represent.

The highlighted letters are the first letter of the style they
represent, except for Superscripts, which is an up arrow; Subscripts,
which is a down arrow; and Pause Printing, which is an hourglass.

SELECT ZOOM OUT FROM THE PAGE MENU

This command will turn all of the highlighted Style characters back
into diamonds.

                    TYPES OF MouseWrite DOCUMENTS

MouseWrite DOCUMENT

This type of document is saved with all of the information MouseWrite
maintains about a document. It saves the size and location of the
window, the tab stops, the margin settings, the page settings, headers
and footers, and the document itself. When the document is opened
later, it will be placed back on the desktop exactly as it was when
you saved it.


TEXT ONLY

This type of document is sometimes called an ASCII Text File.
MouseWrite will save only the text of each line in the document with a
Return character at the end of each line. No other information is
saved with the document. This type of file is useful for creating
documents to be sent by electronic mail, to electronic bulletin
boards, over a modem, for use with Basic programs or virtually any
other type of program. MouseWrite will read these types of files also.

FOR OTHER WORD PROCESSOR

This type of document is similar to a Text Only document except Return
characters are added only to the end of each paragraph. This type of
document may easily be read by another word processor that will read
"Text" files. MouseWrite will read these types of files also.


                  OPENING A NEW MouseWrite DOCUMENT

ACTIVATE THE DOCUMENT WINDOW THAT'S CURRENTLY OPEN, IF NECESSARY.

Choose Close from the File menu. If there are no unsaved changes,
MouseWrite closes the window immediately. Otherwise, a dialog box will
be placed on the desktop letting you save the changes. Click in Close
to close the window and throw away the changes. Click in Cancel to
save the changes.

CHOOSE OPEN A DOCUMENT FROM THE FILE MENU.

A dialog box will appear on the desktop. 

CLICK OPEN A NEW DOCUMENT IN THE DIALOG BOX.

Click Open.  A new untitled document is created and its window is
opened on the desktop.

                    OPENING AN EXISTING DOCUMENT

ACTIVATE THE DOCUMENT WINDOW THAT'S CURRENTLY OPEN, IF NECESSARY.
         
Choose Close from the File menu. If there are no unsaved changes,
MouseWrite closes the window immediately. Otherwise, a dialog box will
be placed on the desktop letting you save the changes. Click in Close
to close the window and throw away the changes. Click in Cancel box to
save the changes.

CHOOSE OPEN A DOCUMENT FROM THE FILE MENU.







A dialog box will appear on the desktop. Click on either Drive 1 or
Drive 2 depending on where the document is stored.

CLICK OPEN.

A new dialog box will be placed on the desktop showing all of the
MouseWrite documents, file folders and TXT type files on the selected
disk. If the document is not displayed, press the down arrow of the
scroll bar to see more files.

CLICK ON THE NAME OF THE DOCUMENT TO OPEN.

CLICK OPEN.

The documents window will be opened on the desktop, the mouse pointer
changes to an hourglass requesting you to wait for a moment. When the
document is fully opened, the window will display the document at the
point where you left off.

       OPENING A DOCUMENT FROM A DRIVE OTHER THAN DRIVE 1 OR 2

ACTIVATE THE DOCUMENT WINDOW THAT'S CURRENTLY OPEN, IF NECESSARY.
         
Choose Close from the File menu. If there are no unsaved changes,
MouseWrite closes the window immediately. Otherwise, a dialog box will
be placed on the desktop letting you save the changes. Click in Close
to close the window and throw away the changes. Click in Cancel to
save the changes.
         
CHOOSE OPEN A DOCUMENT FROM THE FILE MENU.

A dialog box will appear on the desktop. Click on From a File Folder.
Type the name of the disk (file folder) from which you wish to open.

CLICK OPEN.

A new dialog box will be placed on the desktop showing all of the
MouseWrite documents, file folders and TXT type files in the selected
folder. If the document is not displayed, press the down arrow of the
scroll bar to see more files. 

CLICK ON THE NAME OF THE DOCUMENT TO OPEN.

CLICK OPEN.

The documents window will be opened on the desktop, the mouse pointer
changes to an hourglass requesting you to wait for a moment. When the
document is fully opened, the window will display the document at the
point where you left off.

IF THE DOCUMENT IS STORED INSIDE ANOTHER FILE FOLDER, CLICK ON THE
NAME OF THE FOLDER AND THEN CLICK OPEN.

Another dialog box will be opened showing the contents of that file
folder.

                         QUITTING MouseWrite

ACTIVATE THE DOCUMENT WINDOW THAT'S CURRENTLY OPEN, IF NECESSARY.
 
Choose Close from the File menu. If there are no unsaved changes,
MouseWrite closes the window immediately. Otherwise, a dialog box will
be placed on the desktop letting you save the changes. Click in Close
to close the window and throw away the changes. Click in Cancel to
save the changes.

CHOOSE QUIT FROM THE FILE MENU.

Click Quit to quit MouseWrite, otherwise Click Cancel.


                          SETTING THE CLOCK

CHOOSE CLOCK FROM THE MouseWrite MENU.

CLICK THE DIAMOND BUTTON ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE CLOCK WINDOW.

The Set Time/Set Alarm window is placed on the desktop.

Using the left half of the window, press the diamond below the item to
be changed: hour, minute, second, AM/PM, month, day, year. Release the
mouse button when the correct setting is shown in the window.

CLICK THE SET TIME/SET ALARM WINDOW'S CLOSE BOX TO REMOVE IT FROM THE
DESKTOP.

The clock may be left open on the desktop or closed. It will continue
to keep proper time even if it is closed.

                        USING THE ALARM CLOCK

CHOOSE CLOCK FROM THE MouseWrite MENU.

CLICK THE DIAMOND BUTTON ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE CLOCK WINDOW.

The Set Time/Set Alarm window is placed on the desktop.

Set the time and date of the clock if required (see Setting the Clock,
in this chapter).

Using the right half of the window, press the diamond below the number
to be changed: hour, minute, second. Release the mouse button when the
correct setting is shown in the window.

Click the ON button in the window.

CLICK THE SET TIME/SET ALARM WINDOW'S CLOSE BOX TO REMOVE IT FROM THE
DESKTOP.


When the alarm goes off, every click of the mouse button will beep the
Apple's internal speaker.

To turn off the alarm, open the Clock window, click the diamond button
in the clock window and then click the OFF button in the Set Time/Set
Alarm window. Close the Set Time/Set Alarm window.
 
                         TO PLAY THE PUZZLE

CHOOSE PLAY PUZZLE FROM THE MouseWrite MENU.

MOVE THE POINTER TO THE LETTER TO BE MOVED AND CLICK.

Only letters adjacent to a blank square can be moved. The letter will
move into the blank square.

THE OBJECT

Arrange the letters in alphabetical order from left to right, top to
bottom with the blank square in the lower right hand corner.

Playing the Puzzle is a good exercise for those unfamiliar with
pointing with the mouse.

                         TO SELECT A PRINTER

CHOOSE SELECT A PRINTER FROM THE MouseWrite MENU.

The Select a Printer window is placed on the desktop.

CLICK ON THE APPROPRIATE PRINTER.

Click on the appropriate type of card (serial or parallel).

CLOSE THE SELECT A PRINTER WINDOW.

                      MouseWrite WITHOUT A MOUSE

The mouse makes using MouseWrite as easy as point and click.
MouseWrite can, however, be used without a mouse.

CHOOSING COMMANDS FROM MENUS

When the ESC key is pressed a menu is pulled down. The menu puleed
down is the last menu used. If no menu was previously used, the
MouseWrite menu is chosen.

The up/down arrow keys are used to move up and down the chosen menu.

The right/left arrow keys choose the next or previous menu.

To choose a command, use the arrow keys to highlight the command and
then press the RETURN key.

To cancel a pulled down menu press ESC.

USING DIALOG BOXES

Pushbuttons in dialog boxes all have numbers to their left. Pressing
the Open Apple key with the numeric key corresponding to the number to
the left of the pushbutton to be pressed will push the push button.

Pressing RETURN corresponds with pressing the OK box, pressing ESC
corresponds with pressing the CANCEL box.

SELECTING DOCUMENTS IN THE OPEN DIALOG BOX

The contents of a disk or folder are shown in the Open dialog box.
Press the Open Apple and a number from 1 to 7 corresponding to the
documents place in the list. Press RETURN to OPEN the document.

Use the arrow keys to scroll through the contents of the window.

Press ESC to CANCEL.

CHANGING LEFT AND RIGHT MARGINS

Press Open Apple L to change the left margin. Use the arrow keys to
move the left margin marker. Press RETURN to accept.

Press Open Apple R to change the right margin. Use the arrow keys to
move the right margin. Press RETURN to accept. Press ESC to CANCEL.

SELECTING TEXT IN A DOCUMENT

Press Open Apple M (M to Mark a selection). Use the arrow keys to
make the selection. Press RETURN to accept. Press ESC to CANCEL.

EXTENDING A SELECTION OF TEXT IN A DOCUMENT

Move to the end of the text to be selected with the arrow keys. Press
Closed Apple M. The text is selected from the beginning of the
previous selection to the new end of the selection. Use the arrow keys
to continue selecting. Press RETURN to accept. Press ESC to CANCEL.

SETTING AND CLEARING TABS

Move the insertion point to the location a tab is to be added to, or
cleared. Press Open Apple TAB to add or clear.

SCROLLING BY THE WINDOWFUL

Press Open Apple UP or DOWN arrow to scroll up or down one windowful.

Press Open Apple LEFT or RIGHT arrow to scroll sideways.






USING THE PAGE SETUP WINDOW

The numbers 1 to 6 appear on the left in the Set Page window. Pressing
Open Apple and a numeric key will move the setting higher, or to the
left on indentation. Pressing Closed Apple and a numeric key will move
the setting lower, or to the right on indentation.

Pressing Open Apple Y corresponds with clicking the Page Header Yes
button. The Header window will be opened on the desktop. Type the
text in the Header window, using styles from the Style menu if
desired. Press RETURN when done.

Pressing Open Apple N corresponds with clicking the Page Header No
button.

Pressing Closed Apple Y corresponds with clicking the Page Footer Yes
button. The Footer window will be opened on the desktop. Type the
text in the Footer window, using styles from the Style menu if
desired. Press RETURN when done.

Pressing Closed Apple N corresponds with clicking the Page Footer No
button.

When all adjustments have been made in the Page Setup window, choose
Close from the File menu to close the window.

FIND/REPLACE

Type the text to be found using styles from the Style menu if
required.

Press TAB to move to the REPLACE: field and type the replacement text
using styles from the Style menu if required.

Use TAB to move back and forth from the FIND: field and the REPLACE:
field.

Pressing RETURN will FIND NEXT.

Pressing Open Apple 1 will FIND NEXT.

Pressing Open Apple 2 will REPLACE THEN FIND NEXT.

Pressing Open Apple 3 will REPLACE ALL.

Pressing Open Apple 4 will CANCEL.

The Find/Replace window may also be closed by using Close from the
File menu.






MAKING SELECTIONS IN THE PRINT DOCUMENT DIALOG BOXES

Open Apple 1 selects High Quality printing.

Open Apple 2 selects Draft Quality printing.

Open Apple 3 selects Continuos paper.

Open Apple 4 selects Sheets of paper.

Pressing RETURN starts printing. Pressing ESC will CANCEL the dialog
box.

Once printing starts, Open Apple 1 will Pause printing; Open Apple 2
will Continue printing; and Open Apple 3 will Cancel printing.

THE FAKE MOUSE POINTER

Pressing and holding down the Open Apple key, and pressing and
releasing the Closed Apple key will put a 'fake' mouse pointer on the
desktop.

The arrow keys may be used to move this pointer around the desktop as
long as the Open Apple key is held down.

Once the pointer is at the desired location, pressing the Closed
Apple key simulates pressing the mouse button. This may be used to
make selections, push buttons, set the clock, etc.
