
[The Necromancer joins Club 96]
[Source: The Deathstar]


>Numb< 74 of 75
>Subj< ....
>From< The Necromancer
>Date< February 15, 1989 at 5:05 am



Well, i guess it's about time i posted something about joining Club 96 huh?
Inquiring minds want to know.

Well, here's the scoop, there is none, First Class as you may know has just
been me for well over the last year, which was great, i enjoyed it very much, i
had all room i wanted to do whatever i wanted, and it was great in the
begining, i can say i actually worked with rob on his last crack. For you
trivia buffs, it was Epyx Movie Monster Game, not the greatest ware but heh, a
ware is a ware and a pirate is a pirate, well, some people p0ze as pirates, we
could call them "pIe-rAteZ", ya thats fitting. Anyways, im babbling again, for
you who have only been around for a short time, i was first in Coast to Coast,
gee wasn't everyone, no offense, then in FC, but now it's time to move on, The
Appolusionist is very knowledgable, and Static Vengence is right up there, i
just couldn't see adding new members to First Class and possibly tarnishing the
image that it has, and starting a new group was on the fire, but im sorta lazy
and since i don't phreak it's kinda hard to contact people, basically i want to
really get back into the whole thing again full force, like 2 years ago, infact
i was talking to Sorcerer's Apprentice a few days ago, and he wants to put
Red-Sector-A back up, and that has some posible, future in it, but thats a big
MAYBE.

 Enough babbling, i felt Club 96 had the most to offer, and i said hey, what
the fuck, im not doing anything, and there not p0zer's, like certain other
pirates, correction, that should be A certain other pIe-rAte, which im sure we
can all guess, so thats the scoop, not much, but i thought i better comment
before everyone get's some sort of crum story going around.

 The Necromancer


