

POWER BOTS
Released 05-JAN-85 by The Safe Cracker

The object of the game is to make it
to the ground floor of the building.
You start at level 4 and try to work
your way down. To complete the level
you must find the power station. This
is done by using the power search key
on empty rooms. If you find the power
you will be re-energized and
transported to the next level.

When encountering a creature, try to
decide whether he is a friend or foe.
If a friend try to get information
from him. If a foe, blast him with
a weapon. (certain weapons work on
certain creatures.) If you kill him
then take his power. The hail key is
essential for information.

When the level starts you are allowed
to choose two weapons. The space bar
changes the weapon and the return key
selects it.
 
the keyboard layout is as follows

1 - Weapon 1
2 - Weapon 2
3 - Jump Left
4 - Jump Right
5 - Jump Up
6 - Jump Down
7 - Hail
8 - Power Search
9 - Get Power
0 - Get Info


The game is much easier to play if
you make a key guide and lay it on top
of your keyboard.
 
