

Ultra Unboot D0x (hey, that rhymes with B0x!@#!1)
by Sorcerer's Apprentice

I bet you're all wondering just what Ultra Unboot does, eh?  I'll get to that
in a minute.

I was inspired to write this when The Necromancer told me of his conversation
with Roman (aka The Crasher) of USAlliance.  He was ragging on The Voice Over
and Tom E. Hawk because he said their loaders were too easy to take off.  He
said he wrote his own loader, Ultraboot, which was almost impossible to
remove. In fact, it was so hard to remove, they claimed even Mr. Slick
couldn't do it!
Since I doubted Roman was that smart, I leeched a copy of Knight Orc and took
a look at the loader.  Just as I suspected, it was a lame attempt at
modifying Intercept, the standard for Apple //e loaders written by The Voice
Over.

Then I had an idea.  If the loader was soo hard to remove, I should write a
program to remove it for everybody!  After looking into it some more, I was
disappointed to find that the loader was quite easy to remove.  But what the
hell, I decided to write a program to remove it anyway.

The result is Ultra Unboot.  Simply BRUN it from DOS (ProDOS is not
supported) and after displaying a few screens of elite information, it will
prompt you to insert a disk with Ultraboot installed on it.  Simply insert a
ware that those losers released using Ultraboot into Slot 6, Drive 1 and hit
a key.  The loader will quickly be removed, and your system will be rebooted.
What could be simpler?  I bet you all thought you'd have to pay $19.95 plus
shipping and handling for this, eh?  What a bargain!

Maybe one day The Crasher will surprise us all by becoming a real pirate.
Until that time, we'll all just have to pretend he and his lame group doesn't
exist by using Ultra Unboot to save us from having to look at their unsightly
title pages.

Sorcerer's Apprentice
January 19, 1988
