Chat between The Slipped Disk and The SysOp of The pirate's chest 5/25/85
=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=--=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

SO=SysOp
SD=Slipped Disk


SO:HEY, YOU WOULDN'T HAPPEN TO HAVE THE NUMBER TO ANY 914 MCI, WOULD YOU?

SD:NOT OFFHAND. LISTEN, I WANTED YOU TO KNOW A LITTLE SOMETHING THAT YOU 
PROBABLY ALREADY KNOW ABOUT.

SO:OK, GO AHEAD

SD:S.F. II AND S.F. III WERE BUSTED <- ON SATURDAY. 

SO:FOR WHAT?

SD:ILLEGAL MESSAGES.

(Pause)

SO:AH HA... KNOW ANYTHING ELSE ABOUT IT?

SD:NOT REALLY. ONE OF MY FRIENDS WAS ON THE LINE WITH HIGH TECHNOLOGY WHEN 
THE GUYS CAME IN THE DOOR.

SO:NICE... I WILL HAVE TO GIVE ONE OF THEM A CALL... 

SD:THE NUMBERS SHOULD BE DISCONNECTED BY NOW....

SO:I KNOW THAT ALL OF CREATIVE'S PERSONALS AND HIGH TECH`S MOTHERS'S LINE 
WON'T BE

SD: RIGHT. CHECK IT OUT. I WON'T POST ANYTHING ABOUT IT JUST YET. 

SO:OK, THANKS... I'LL LET YA KNOW WHAT HAPPENS...

SD:OK.

SO:BYE

Press <RETURN> to access the system.

Command:



Chat between The Slipped Disk and the SysOp of Satan's Hollow ][ 5/27/85 
=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-==-=-==-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

SD:Hello?

SO:Yeah, What's up?

SD:I was wondering, didn't we speak about my giving you g-files about two weeks
ago?

SO:Maybe, I dont remember, its ok though..i got a few cool ones for next week. 

SD:Need any? I got quite a few.

SO:Any thing terrific?

SD:What do you consider terrific?

SO:Something like Thriller (which wasnt TERRIFIC, but cool),..you know, with 
trick bk/spcs and ones that make fun of rodentz

SD:Oh...RODENT FILES! I have about 3 very good ones.

SO:cool...how do you want to trade?


SD:I can only trade ascii.

SO:Fine

SD:Would It be possible to do this tonight?

SO:Yeah, how you wanna do it?

SD:Whatever way you want.

SO:Well...what are the options?

SD:Mostly me sending it ascii and you buffering... or an upload function on 
your board (which I don't know if you have)

SO:I have it, but I turned the feature off..I think Ill put it back on 
though... ok...well, is there anyway you can upload it into a msg? 

SD:I guess... What is your max line length?

SO:30

SD:You would have to increase it.

SO:Cant...how about......never mind...its ok...i Can do without them for a 
while...thanks anyway...

SD:Ok. This board has a lot of potential the way it is set up at the moment, 
and I want to make it one of the BEST in the north east.

SO:Thanks a lot for your help...the only problem is that It's hard for me to 
take the board up and down to use AE..very VERY hard...its a chore setting the 
board up..i should have made it easier..well..i dont know...If you ever get 
something really special let me know..we started a group called R0DENTZBUSTERZ
and we were looking for some G's about them.. (we're writing our own..but 
since me and Torino Man dont live very near we cant get togther to do it)

SD:What town DO you live in?

SO:S.V. (spring valley, he lives in nanuet,,about 5 miles) 

SD:Oh. I live in Fishkill and Brewster.

SO:Yeah...thats a bit furthur than nanuuet...ok..well.. thanks anyway..Ill let 
you know though..

SD:Oh, by the way .. Is it possible for you to get rid of my number in your 
files?

SO:Why is that?

SD:Some of these messages are a bit dangerous.

SO:Yeah.. I've never given out and I keep the Stats on another disk ( 
sequential form) ) so there really isnt any way of finding out..

SD:Just wouldn't want the disk to fall into the hands of a long arm (if you 
know what I mean.

SO:Yeah ..well if it means so much to you ill get rid of it (cant promise 
when..but il will)

SD:Thank you.

SO:No problem..you saw ERIC HALEN's msg huh? 

SD:The CC'S? Yep.

SO:No, the # posting Free Wheeler's number

SD:Both.

SO:Where are the CC's?

SD:Didn't know? On the elite.

SO:Thats TORINO

SD:O Fine. Just that CC #S ALWAYS get me nervous..

SO:I know...according to him, he has tons, but I personnally think he's a 
harmless.. ( harmless.. (aside from ordering a hard meg or 2.. ((only kidding, 
dont get nervouse again))

SD:I don't worry about that. I've been involved in CC fraud, it's just that
when A person gets in trouble on a board, the people who were also on the board
aren't in a great position.

SO:You have had your CC#'s stolen?

SD:No. A friend tried to send some merchandise to my nearby (empty) neighbors 
house. I But some people moved in and naturally declined to sign papers that 
came with the computers.

SO:Shit...I can see where you are coming from...Ok...well like I said I cant 
promise it'll be done overnight, but ill get rid of (or at least change) yer #.
...listen Ive seen you on a lot of 1200 Ae lines...Do you trade a lot? 

SD:What do you mean on 1200 ae lines?

SO:Just saw some msgs addressed to you and shit

SD:Oh? I didn't know... AE lines have messages? Not the ones I've been on.

SO:They have the <C>opy command people use to send msgs..I think I saw only 1
addressed to you

SD:What was it about?

SO:Didnt bother reading it...don't worry, it was from the sysop I think, Ive 
been sent plenty of msgs by him, I the first of nwh which he asked for if Id 
give him some inf info about myself..

SD:Oh. I have an apple (and an IBM, Which I use for telecomm.) But I have a 
non-working (for the moment) applemodem. If I do trading it's for very old 
wares.

SO:Uh huh..ok gotta go...later 

SD:Ok

SD:[?=Menu] Command :BYE.
