national Coalition of Alternative Community Schools
NCACS
POB 15036
Santa Fe, NM  87506
(505) 474-4312

	i'm not affiliated with the group, but i ran accross one of their
pamphlets recently and think they may be helpful to folks looking for
alternatives from state education systems.  i know that some of you are working
toward creating schools in your communities; maybe NCACS can help with things
like dealing with state repression (which you will likely face).  i've
transcribed part of the pamphlet below, but if you're interested, you should
write them for more info...

ORIGINS AND OBJECTIVES

In May, 1976, several hundred representatives from alternative educational
programs met in Chicago at the Education for Change" Comference, where they
drafted a Statement of Objectives.  

Based on this statement, NCACS was founded in June, 1978, when the following
Preamble and Statement of Objectives was formally adopted.

PREAMBLE TO THE BYLAWS

We are a national coalition of schools, groups and individuals committed to
creating an egalitarian society by actively working against racism, sexism,
ageism, and all forms of social, political and economic oppression.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTIVES

The object and purposes of the Coalition are to support an educational process
which is alternative
	1. in intention, working to empower people to actively and collectively
direct their lives;
	2. in form, requiring the active control of education by the students,
parents, teachers, and community members who are most directly affected;
	3. in content, developing tools and skills to work for social justice."

NETWORKING

The primary function of the NCACS is to facilitate networking for its members
as well as other interested parties.  Currently there are nearly 300 members
composed of schools, communities, home educators and others who support
non-traditional educational alternatives throughout the us and in 20 countries. 
We receive hundreds of inquiries every year about all aspects of alternative
education.  Many of these are from peoople seeking information on existing
alternative programs, and those wanting to establish a new alternative school
or homeschool.  we also hear frequently from individuals looking for jobs or
careers in alternative education.   all receive as much assistance as possible.

WHAT ARE MEMBER SCHOOLS LIKE?

members of the coalition have developed many different environments for
learning:  large schools, small schools, and home schools; day schools and
boarding schools; independent and traveling schools.  various age groupings
exist, ranging from babies to senior citizens.  many programs have low
student/teacher ratios and encourage freedom balanced with responsibility. 
approaches emphasize field trips, apprenticeships, the world as campus and
living as learning.  some members of the coalition are new, and others have
been operating very successfully for decades.

