
This is an electronic version of the first section of Volume 2
Issue 1 of The Anarchives.

If you wish to receive the real copy (which rocks) send your
snail-mail address to:

yakimov@ecf.utoronto.ca

This issue's theme is on Anarchy & Marijuana

The Anarchives
	The Anarchives			Volume 2 Issue 1 Free
		The Anarchives
                  |
                 |.|
                 |.|
                |\./|
                |\./|
.               |\./|               .
 \^.\          |\\.//|          /.^/
  \--.|\       |\\.//|       /|.--/
    \--.| \    |\\.//|    / |.--/
     \---.|\    |\./|    /|.---/
        \--.|\  |\./|  /|.--/
           \ .\  |.|  /. /
 _ -_^_^_^_-  \ \\ // /  -_^_^_^_- _
   - -/_/_/- ^ ^  |  ^ ^ -\_\_\- -

The struggle contines...

Sentences begin by stringing words together.

Freedom comes from stringing ideas together

Free thoughts constructed on free minds.

This struggle creates Anarchy.

Those old Greek guys (Socrates, Plato, Aristotle) believed the
fundamental idea that all citizens could not be philosophers.
How could an Ancient city, or even a modern one, have the
ability to produce and prosper if all its citezenry were to busy
thinkin. Only a select few must be free-minded, and they will
rule over the herd.

"What The Fuck!" you might say. "Are they saying that if there
were to be real freedom of thought the city (nation) would
collapse?"

Interesting way of lookin at it isn't it? It sort of implies
that by merely reaching for free minds we are on our way out of
Babylon. Perhaps the chance to turn off the exploitative,
hirarchical, liberal, twenty-four hour boob-tube.



What we have here is a rule of destruction masked by lies of
decency and democracy. Centuries of patriarchal domination have
left a messed up male race, a beaten up female race, a
devastated aboriginal race, a multi-billion dollar arms race and
a-how-quickly can we destroy all the earth's life race. The
freedom to be oneself and the responsibility to care for one's
community has been lost in an unnatural order. The order is
state, structure, symbol and you. A successful order nurtures
the roles of individuals to be subservient to the order. The
hegemony that has been internalized in all of us cannot be
washed away by simply destroying state, though this would be a
good start.

All forms of authority shoud be abolished and replaced by the
social self. Equality can only exist under small groups free of
coercion. Group discussion with no onus on individuals to follow
consensus is far healthier than mass dictated discipline.

Where is the passion that should accompany freedom. How many
people are aware of their consumers distributing freedom. They
are all corrupt jurors getting lazy on their fat bribe from the
state.

I can't let myself become a passive spectator of history that is
dominated by oppression.

I make love to the darkness. I am drawn into the blues of the
oppression and struggle that exists today. I slowly, but surely
become aware of my own position within society, and its relation
to the world outside the classroom. I sit in the back of the
class and fume as I see the lies, the double-speak, and the
occasional truth both favourable and unfavourable.

I am drawn into the struggle. My heart, mind, and my body are in
love with the battle for freedom. My consciousness expands and I
become aware of my actions, thoughts, and surrounding
environment. The truth becomes clear, and as I join my friends,
collectively this increases.

As potentially free minds we must come together and pursue the
quest for truth, justice, and equality. For regaining liberty
and community will take a nation of  free minds. Freedom cannot
be authorized. I can't tell you what it is as much as you can't
tell me what it isn't. I can't make rules for you, you can't
make rules for me, because the choices are inside ourselves.

Cannabis is one method of realizing potently the stone in
ourselves. The stone in ourselves is our energy source, what
makes us go according to the rythym of our hearts. I don't care
about how much of something you or I ingest. Quantity isn't a
question of focusness. The more I climb up a mountain the more
countryside I see. As I ascend my focus might fog. Fog is just
dense sky between two or more parameters of myself. Many sober
people never leave this fog. Critics of ganja smoking that I've
come across fall into two groups. The first group are those herb
opponents who cherish their unilinear clarity so much they seem
fogged. The other group are those tokers who are concerned with
questions of quantity because they ignore the stone in
themselves. Like the cool, refreshing feeling of filtered water
sliding down the gullet, absorbing space, activating dry energy,
the herb enhances the world's infinite creations of which the
self is the source.

The answer isn't in poisons like pot or ideologies like
Anarchism. The answer isn't in politik or ego-power or elite
power. Time is running out for us to realize that the answer is
within ourselves as a social species. It's time for us to stop
the game of capitalist competition. The answer is in joining
compassion with reason and action. All the revolution needs is
some strong spirit.



This issue marks the second volume of The Anarchives. As a
periodical (newspaper, zine, rag, whatever...) we publish
information that relates to the lives of radicals struggling for
freedom in an exploitative system. Through The Anarchy
Organization we hope to publish not only The Anarchives, but
various other publications in the purpose of spreading the word
to all our peoples.

We are open to contributions ranging from the creative, to the
intensely analytical. Our attitudes towards submissions reflect
our attitudes towards life. That is feel free to give us
whatever you want. There should be no limits to language or
prose or intelectual exploration and development. We welcome all
voices of liberation.

We are planning our next issue to focus on the struggle for
women's liberation. Please help us create a well rounded
perspective on this issue by submitting something.

Similarly any other help, be it labour or financial would also
be greatly appreciated. We grow as you grow.

Escape from Babylon...


The Force told me that Haase, Jennifer <HAASEJ@MUSIC.LIB.MATC.EDU> wrote:
>    Any artist out there; fans of Star Wars, who could create a sketch
>of Darth Vader?  Would apperciate it "mucho"
>                                         -Jen

Here's one done by Lennert Stewart (I think that's what the LS stands for, my
apologies if it isn't LS :)

     _________________________________
    |:::::::::::::;;::::::::::::::::::|  ___
    |:::::::::::'~||~~~``:::::::::::::| |   |
    |::::::::'   .':     o`:::::::::::| | D | a r t h   V a d e r
    |:::::::' oo | |o  o    ::::::::::| |___|
    |::::::: 8  .'.'    8 o  :::::::::|
    |::::::: 8  | |     8    :::::::::|
    |::::::: _._| |_,...8    :::::::::|
    |::::::'~--.   .--. `.   `::::::::|
    |:::::'     =8     ~  \ o ::::::::|
    |::::'       8._ 88.   \ o::::::::|
    |:::'   __. ,.ooo~~.    \ o`::::::|
    |:::   . -. 88`78o/:     \  `:::::|
    |::'     /. o o \ ::      \88`::::| "He will join us or die."
    |:;     o|| 8 8 |d.        `8 `:::|
    |:.       - ^ ^ -'           `-`::|
    |::.                          .:::|
    |:::::.....           ::'     ``::|
    |::::::::-'`-        88          `|
    |:::::-'.          -       ::     |
    |:-~. . .                   :     |
    | .. .   ..:   o:8      88o       |
    |. .     :::   8:P     d888. . .  |
    |.   .   :88   88      888'  . .  |
    |   o8  d88P . 88   ' d88P   ..   |
    |  88P  888   d8P   ' 888         |
    |   8  d88P.'d:8  .- dP~ o8       |
    |      888   888    d~ o888    LS |
    |_________________________________|


War on Human Being

"Give me crack, anal sex;

take the only tree that's left

stuff it up the hole in your culture.

Give me back my burning wall,

give me Stalin and St. Paul

I've seen the future brother

and its murder."

	- Leonard Cohen "The Future"



The governments of most States are waging war on human beings.
this war is often waged through "laws" which are supposedly
designed to protect human welfare but are actually instruments
of repression and violence. the laws around drugs are an
excellent case in point. A small group of people, the power
elite, have deceived the majority regarding the use of
marijuana. The power elite, and thus the state are waging a
violent war on peaceful human beings who wish to explore other
forms of knowing, forms which the power elite want repressed.
These "other" forms of knowing threaten the forms which the
state relies upon to maintain power. The power of the state
derives exlusively form psychological manipulation, or to put it
frankly, its all in your mind.

The first thing that happened to me when I began using pot
seriously (ie, past that teenage phase when you get wrecked with
the gang and giggle for two hours but a serious experiment of
prolonged periods) was I began questioning everything that I
once held as true or that once held me from thinking. More than
that, I began to push my intellect farther because I no longer
feared it. Imagination opened up as the ordered thought broke
down.
                                                                            
                                 ..eee..                                    
                             z$P""     ""*$c                                
                           dP"             ^*b                              
                         zP                   *c                            
                        $"                     ^$                           
                      .$                         $.                         
                     .$                           *.                        
                     $"                            $                        
                    dF  .e$$$$b.                    b                       
                    $ .$$$$$$$$$$c                  3                       
                   $F.$$$$$$$$$$$$b                  $                      
                   $ $$$$$$$$$$$$$$L                 $                      
                   $J$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$                 4                      
                  4$$$$$$$"   $$$$$$r      4$$$      4r                     
                  4$$$$$$$    4$$$$$F      $$$$F     4F                     
                  4$$$$$$$    d$$$$$b      3$$$      4F                     
                   $$$$$$$$ee$$$$$$$$        "       $                      
                   $$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$.              .$                      
                   $$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$              $$                      
                   ^$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$.          .$$"                      
                    $$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$b.      .d$$$                       
                     $$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$                        
                     '$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$%                        
                      "$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$"                         
                       ^$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$"                          
                         *$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$P                            
                          ^$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$"                             
                            ^*$$$$$$$$$$$$$P"                               
                                "**$$$**"    Gilo94'                               


Deregulating Drug Use

an anarchist perspective

The debate about drug use in this country is usually framed in
terms of continued criminalization vs legalization. the
positions in this debate mean continued harassment, including
arrests, imprisonment, theft of property, and possibly in the
near future, execution of drug dealers and users, vs legal
regulation of drug use and sales, similar to that of alcohol and
cigarettes, including heavy taxation, and restraints on where,
when and to whom drugs can be sold. Both of these positions are
based on the same assumption, government has the right to tell
individuals what they can and cannot do. While legalization
would surely be preferable to continued criminalization, there
is a third alternative: decriminalization and deregulation.

Decriminalization and deregulation of drugs would mean no laws
against drugs, no government regulation of drugs sales and use,
no arrests, no prisons, no taxes. Eliminating drug laws, instead
of simply replacing them with different laws, would produce a
free market in drugs where     people would be free to sell,
ingest, or inject whatever they wished, without government
interference. Drug use is a voluntary, non-violent activity, and
should be an individual decision, the business of no one but the
user. Government has taken it upon itself to regulate drug use,
just as it regulates alcohol use, restricts abortion, and
registers and drafts people. in order to better control people.

Criminalization of drugs has produced, just as prohibition of
alcohol did, an enormous amount of violent crime. Most of this
crime is motivated by the need to obtain money to pay the
artificially inflated price of illegal drugs. This
drug-associated crime is then used as an excuse for police to
indiscriminately harass young black men, stopping and searching,
and frequently arresting them on the street, for no reason other
than that they live in a "high crime" area. Doing away with drug
laws would dramatically lower the cost of drugs and thereby
eliminate most street crime, as well as remove the excuse police
use to terrorize black people.

Decriminalization and deregulation and the resultant competitive
market in drugs would produce purer and safer drugs, eliminating
much of the death and illness associated with drug use, most of
which is caused by contamination of drugs or needles, and
unreliable drug strength, not by the nature of the drug itself.
Heroin is no more dangerous than aspirin if it is carefully
prepared without dangerous additives and injected with a sterile
needles. And aspirin overdose can kill as easily as heroin
overdose, it just takes longer and feels worse. Decriminalizing
needle use would virtually eliminate the transmission of AIDS
among IV drug users, as has been the experience     in the 38
American states which do not restrict sale of sterile needles.
Needle exchange programs are not enough; there need to be more
needles available to eliminate needle sharing.

Besides abolishing laws against recreational drugs, eliminating 
government regulation of "therapeutic" drugs would also benefit
people. The FDA prevents many drugs from reaching the market,
including treatments for AIDS, cancer and other serious
illnesses. And those that do eventually become available are
delayed for years by FDA rules, while thousands die. The
government is currently responsible for restrictions on
aerosolized pentamidine, a drug which prevents Pneumocystis
carinii pneumonia. the most frequent cause of death in people
who have AIDS. Just as drug laws lead to deaths associated with
street drugs and keep people from obtaining sterile needles to
prevent transmission of AIDS, drug laws are killing people with
AIDS by denying them effective treatment. Drug laws in this
country are also preventing marketing of newly developed
abortifacients, drugs which induce abortion early in pregnancy,
freeing women from their current reliance on the medical
establishment for abortion services. these drugs would put the
decision about abortion where it belongs: with the individual.

Eliminating drug laws would greatly increase people's options in
the areas of pleasure and health. It would also reduce crime,
reduce death and illness associated with illegal drug use, and
reduce deaths from AIDS and other serious illnesses. Individuals
should be free to make their own decisions about drug use, and
all other aspects of their lives, without the interference of
government or "the community".

Boston Anarchist Drinking Brigade (BAD Brigade)

PO Box 1323

Cambridge, MA 02238

Internet: bbrigade@world.std.com



Chomsky On Universities

In its relation to society, a free university should be expected
to be, in a sense, ``subversive.'' We take it for granted that
creative work in any field will challenge prevailing orthodoxy.
Aphysicist who refines yesterday's experiment, an engineer who
merely seeks to improve existing devices, an artist who limits
himself to styles and techniques that have been thoroughly
explored, is rightly regarded as deficient in creative
imagination. Exciting work in science, technology,
scholarship,or the arts will probe the frontiers of
understanding and try tocreate alternatives to the conventional
assumptions. If, in somefield of inquiry this is no longer true,
then the field will be abandoned by those who seek intellectual
adventure. These observations are clich\'es that few will
question---except in the study of man and society. The social
critic who seeks to formulate a vision of a more just and human
social order, and is concerned with the discrepancy---more
often, the chasm---that separates this vision from the reality
that confronts him, is a frightening creature who must
``overcome his alienation'' and become ``responsible,''
``realistic,'' and ``pragmatic.'' To decode these expressions:
he must stop questioning our values and threatening our
privilege. He may be concerned with technical modifications of
existing society that improve its efficiency and blur its
inequities, but he must not try to design a radically different
alternative and involve himself in an attempt to bring about
social change. He must, therefore, abandon the path of creative
inquiry as it is conceived in other domains.  It  is hardly
necessary to stress that this prejudice is even more rigidly
institutionalized in the state socialist societies. Obviously, a
free mind may fall into error; the social critic is no less
immune to this possibility that the inventive scientist or
artist. It may be that at a given stage of technology, themost
important activity is to improve the internal combustion engine,
and that at a given stage of social evolution, primary attention
should be given to the study of  fiscal measures that will
improve the operation of the sytem of state capitalism of the
Western democracies. This is possible, but hardly obvious, in
either case. The universities offer freedom and encouragement to
those who question the first of these assumptions, but more
rarely to those who question the second. The reasons are fairly
clear. Since the dominant voice in any society is that of  the
beneficiaries of the status quo, the ``alienated intellectual''
who tries to pursue the normal path of  honest inquiry---perhaps
falling into error on the way---and thus often finds
himselfchallenging the conventional wisdom, tends to be a lonely
figure.The degree of protection and support afforded him by the
university is, again, a measure of its success in fulfilling its
proper function in society.  It is, furthermore, a measure of
the willingness of the society to submit its ideology and
structure to critical analysis and evaluation, and of  its
willingness to overcome inequities and defects that will be
revealed by such a critique.



Huxley on The Capitalist "Free Press:"

   Today the press is still legally free; but most of the little
papers have disappeared.  The cost of wood-pulp, of
modernprinting machinery and of syndicated news is too high for
theLittle Man.  In the totalitarian East there is political
censorship,and the media of mass communication are controlled by
the state. In the democratic West there is economic censorship
and the media of mass communication are controlled by members of
the Power Elite.  Censorship by rising costs and the
concentration of communication power in the hands of a few big
concerns is less objectionable than State ownership and
government propaganda; but certainly it is not something of
which a Jeffersonian democrat could possibly approve.

   In regard to propaganda the early advocates of universal
literacy and a free press envisaged only two possibilities: the
propaganda might be true, or it might be false.  They did not
foresee what in fact has happened, above all in our
Westerncapitalist democracies -- the development of a vast mass
communications industry, concerned in the main neither with the
true nor the false, but with the unreal, the more or less
totally irrelevant.  In a word, they failed to take into account
man's almost infinite appetite for distractions

   Only the vigilant can maintain their liberties, and only
those who are constantly and intelligently on the spot can hope
to govern themselves effectively by democratic procedures. A
society, most of whose members spend a great part of their time,
not on the spot, not here and now and in the calculable future,
but somewhere else, in the irrelevant other worlds of sport and
soap opera, of mythology and metaphysical fantasy, will find it
hard to resist the enroachments of those who would manipulate
and control  it.

     In their propaganda today's dictators rely for the most
part on repetition, suppression and rationalization -- there
petition of catchwords which they wish to be accepted as true,
the suppression of facts which they wish to be ignored, the
arousal and rationalization of passions which may be used in the
interests of the Party or the State.  As the art and science of
manipulation come to be better understood, the dictators of the
future will doubtless learn to combine these techniques with the
non-stop distractions which, in the West, are now threatening to
drown in a sea of irrelevance the rational propaganda essential
to the maintenance of individual liberty and the survival of
democratic institutions.

Aldous Huxley, 1958

"Brave New World Revisited"

From: John Oleynick <juo@klinzhai.rutgers.edu>




         /-/\-\      The Anarchy Organization      |
        / /  \ \     Free Minds For Free Lives   ( | )
     --|-/----\-\--  yakimov@ecf.utoronto.ca      \|/
       \/      \/    jterpstra@trentu.ca         `_^_'

