
        ARROWBEAR ANARCHIST CONFERENCE MAY 19,20,21 1994
WRITE:AAG POBOX 3223, RUNNING SPRINGS, CA 92382 (310)490-7284

Greetings from the greater Los Angeles area.  Its been a couple of years 
since the last gathering in Long Beach and seems about time for another 
SOuthern California Anarchist Gathering.  This time around we have secured 
a better location for coming together.  We have arrangements to meet at a 
privately run music camp in the mountains above Los Angeles.  There are 
cabin accomodations for about 200 people, plus the option to pitch 
additional tents.  At this point it looks as the the only cost of the event 
will be a $5.00 contribution from each individual going towards the 
purchase of bulk foods to be shared during the weekend.  There are kitchen 
facilities available, and local Food not Bombs groups can provide equipment 
for cooking, but additional provisions are necessary.  If possible, advance 
contributions will make getting neccessary supplies easier.

While the use of this camp is being donated any contributions or clean 
up\repairs will be beneficial to making this event happen.  If we as a 
community can show respect and support for the location there is the 
possibility of additional gatherings at this spot.

At this point the gathering is in the organizational stage.  Needed are 
workshops, discussion topics, presentations, suggestions, or whatever else 
people think would be of benefit to a succesful gathering.

There is already a suggestion that instead of the typical gig, there be an 
accoustic performance evening, including spoken word pieces, performance 
art, acoustic music, or theatres.  There is also space to set up a showing 
of art work or installation pieces.  If you or anyone else is interested in 
displaying something please try to make advance arrangements or 
notification.

At some point after the first of the year there will start to be organizing 
meetings to work out the detailed specifics of the gathering.  If you or 
any organizations you know of are interested in helping please get in 
touch.  This gathering will be a good chance to hook up and get ready for 
another summer of action across the country, as other gatherings will 
follow (EF!, Food not Bombs International Gathering, Rainbow, etc....)

As resources are limited, it would be appreciated if folx could xerox and 
distribute this information to thier respective communities and intersted 
parties.  Any donations or contacts you think would be beneficial to making 
this gathering work should be directed either to the Arrowbear contact 
address or leave a message at the contact phone

