                                   @

                        T H E  S P U N K N I K

                     State of the Collective Bulletin


Issue for 94.46 (Week 46, 1994)

Published by the Spunk Press Collective 
<spunk@lysator.liu.se>

=======================================================================

  The excuse for the existence of Spunk Press is the desire of some
  individuals  to  see alternative literature continue to flourish,
  but this time online!

  The policy of Spunk Press is to act as an  independent  publisher
  of  works  converted to, or produced in, electronic format and to
  spread them as far as possible on the Internet  and  in  the  BBS
  society  free  of  charge. The work may not necessarily originate
  from someone with net access. The major interest of  Spunk  Press
  is  alternative literature and anarchist material, both old, con-
  verted, and newly produced.


  INFORMATION SUBSCRIPTIONS

  Send an e-mail message to 

    spunk-info-request@lysator.liu.se 

  and you will be added to the Spunk Press information distribution.
  This simply means that you will receive the catalogue by e-mail every
  time a new issue is published and that you will receive this 
  newsletter.


  HOW TO REACH THE ARCHIVE

  file://etext.archive.umich.edu/pub/Politics/Spunk

  http://www.cwi.nl/cwi/people/Jack.Jansen/spunk/Spunk_Home.html


  ROBIN FOR THIS ISSUE

  Mikael "MC" Cardell <mc%closet@lysator.liu.se>

=======================================================================


@ IN THIS ISSUE

Items listed below can be searched with your favorite text viewer or
editor. Simply search for "@ foo" and you will find the entry
corresponding to "foo".

  @ Spunk Press and The Spunknik

  @ Spunk Regional Contacts

  @ Anarcocapitalism

  @ Spunk mentioned

  @ New catalogue coming up


@ SPUNK PRESS AND THE SPUNKNIK

Lately there has been a lot of confused messages sent to the
collective from people on the Spunk Press information distribution
that clearly showed that some of the people on the list don't know
they are on the list, don't know what Spunk Press is about and don't
know why on earth they are getting messages such as "please subscribe
me" sent to them.

First, the Spunk Press information distribution is simply a
distribution list intended for Spunk Press catalogues and other
related material, such as this newsletter, and not a general
discussion forum. However, we want the mailing list to be open, so
that anyone in the editorial collective running Spunk Press can post
to it.

The address to subscribe to the information distribution is

   spunk-info-request@lysator.liu.se

but some people send their requests to the list address instead and,
of course, these requests explodes to every address in the file in my
home directory at Lysator instead of ending up in my (mc's) Lysator
mailbox, which is the proper place for requests such as this.

There is another mailing list for internal affairs in Spunk Press ---
the editorial mailing list. This mailing list is also open for
everyone; for people who just want to listen in to what is discussed
or for people who want to partake in the coordination of actions
within Spunk Press. The address for subscripiton to this list is

   spunk-request@lysator.liu.se

and the address

   spunk@lysator.liu.se

is used to get in touch with the collective.

It has been decided at the Spunk Press editorial list, that a regular
newsletter should be sent out through the information distribution
list to help clear the muddle of Spunk Press. This is the first issue.
Robin for this issue is Mikael Cardell <mc%closet@lysator.liu.se> and
I don't really know who's up next as our round-robin editor.


@ SPUNK REGIONAL CONTACTS

There is a new Spunk Press regional contact list available, with
addresses to people involved in Spunk Press for a large number of
countries, now including Croatia and Australia. The file is available
as Spunk_Contacts, I think, in the FTP main archive and through the
WWW home page. See above for addresses.


@ ANARCOCAPITALISM

Spunk Press usually archives alternative literature and texts with a
libertarian socialististic bend, but there a few anarcocapitalistic
files in the archives as well. During the last few weeks there has
been a hefty debate on the collective list if we should keep the
material or not.

The concensus seem to be that we shouldn't bother to actively include
capitalistic texts of any kind, but that we should keep some of the
texts that directly deal with our form of anarchism, such as the
critical piece by Ken Knudson. Texts like this can be marked by being
placed in a special directory in the archives, such as "Criticism of
Anarchism" or something of the sort.


@ SPUNK MENTIONED

o Linsen, a student paper at Link\"oping University, Sweden, carried
an interview with Mikael Cardell, one of the founders of Spunk Press,
in the last issue and gave a favorable review of Spunk Press material.

o An article covering Spunk Press is available at

     http://www.interlog.com/eye

but I haven't had the time to check it out yet.

o Spunk Press was represented at the Anarchy in the UK fair in London.
A detailed report of the event and what it meant for Spunk Press will
show up in this medium as soon as Ian and Micah can get their acts
together and co-write something.

o We were also mentioned in the Internet World magazine, which
published a letter from mc complaining about the incorrect
subscription address for P@ Online that they had carried about six
months ago.

o An article, written by yours truly [that is me, mc], in the last
issue of the large Swedish syndicalist newspaper Arbetaren (Swedish
for "The Worker") deals with network access, anarchists on the net
and, naturally, Spunk Press.


@ NEW CATALOGUE COMING UP

A new issue of the archive has been sent to Paul S at umich. It will
show up as soon as he unpacks it. The new catalogue will be sent out
through the information distribution as soon as we know the archive is
in place.

The new issue has 660 titles, which is N titles more since the last
update. The new version of the archive has special packed DOS archive
available for BBS sysops to download. It's 6 MB. The unpacked archive
is 13 MB.

                                THE END
                                   -
            This text is published on 100% recycled electrons.

