SANTA CLAUS PRIVATIZED.

The eleven workers who answer the
letters from kids in  the UK to
Santa Claus had their pay per letter
reduced to 15p  to 7p when they were
contracted out of the Royal Mail.
Metro  Mail, owners of the elf slave
house refused to comment, the  post
office accused workers of "trying to
destroy the magic of  Christmas".
Meanwhile kids now only receive a
form letter with  a typeset
signature. Not even Christmas is
safe from  Capitalism!
     
     
     YTS.
     
     As more studies showed that there
were probably twice as many 
homeless people as officially
recognized, unemployment was about
to hit the 5 million mark and YTS
was farcical - the  government's
response has been to clamp down on
truancy at  school and a new
"scrounger buster" plan to pilot in
2 areas a  plan to remove 200,000
18-24 year olds from benefits
altogether.
The Unemployment Unit mid-December
survey on YTS showed  that just over
1/2 left these scams early - to go
on to better  paid jobs (well better
than 29.50 a week!) or .....well
fuck  knows. Of the other half -
only one third got any 
qualifications even from the Mickey
Mouse school of street  sweeping.
The employment secretary admitted
that there was no  way to make
employers guarantee long term
employment (a bright  one eh?).At
least they could try and make sure
they survived - as is 4 young people
were killed on YTS schemes and 183
seriously injured  from Jan to June
1993.
The pilot scrounger buster scheme is
to expand the  farcical job plan
scheme from one week to four weeks.
Job Plan  showed it's usefulness for
one claimant who wanted to work 
with animals by suggesting abbatoir
work. People who refuse to 
participate would be  denied
benefit. 
However through actions by U.A.G.'s
and themselves, many  claimants have
ended their job plan courses early
by actions  from joint strikes to
just being pains.
Contact L.U.A.G. [071 733 5135] and
H.U.A.G.[071 249 8086] for more
info, and to join groups in
occupying job plan workshops around
London.
     
     Gulf Hangover

We all knew the US government didn't
give a fuck about working  class
people Iraq - though the gift of 300
tonnes of  "depleted" uranium dust
from 944,000 tank shells in the 
Kuwait/South Iraq area has only just
been exposed. Many of  these were
made at BNFL's Springfields' works
in Preston.
but its also clear that they didn't
give a fuck about  there own
civilians - as is made clear by the
information that  excluding "secret"
CIA tests, the governments and
universities  made human guineapigs
from over a thousand people up till
the  70s. These included 800
pregnant women, 130 prisoners and 68 
people with intelectual disabilities
- oh and 12 tests in  America to see
how fall out works and 48 secret
above ground  tests in the Pacific -
nice one eh?
So it shouldn't come as much
surprise that they don't  give a
fuck for their own squaddies. Even a
doctor who  contracted Gulf War
Syndrome got sacked - while another
who  refused to give untested anti
nerve gas pills was court 
martialed. Meanwhile 4,000 US, 500
UK and 15 children in the  west are
suffering from the unknown after
effects of the  "clean,smart" war.
Reports from Iraq say that there
have also  been increases in
leukemia and birth defects since the 
war.Basically they don't give a
fuck.

Don't drink the water ...

As water disconnections grow - along
with the introduction of water
meters - some bright spark - the
government chief medical officer -
has denied that there is any
connection between this and water
rationing for poor people. Maybe the
500% or so increase in dysentery in
Britain between 1990 and now has
some other cause ... or maybe the
CMO just didn't listen when he was
told to wash his hands at school!

Euro scroungers on tour?

With the Tory party desperately
needing some 'continental'
instruction about how to bonk
discretely it comes as a surprise
that they should go and target
unwaged workers from the rest of the
European Union for benefit cuts. The
new "centre of interests" test will
be applied over the last 5 years and
will affect up to 17,000 people -
including Irish people in Britain.
The fact that benefits are better
almost everywhere else in Europe has
escaped the government - do they
think people come here for the
weather?
