
The Workers Solidarity Movement  are 
holding a conference in Dublin on Saturday 
December 3rd 1994 to look at the lessons 
of our involvement in struggle over the 
last ten years.  We are asking people 
who we feel have a commitment to 
fighting for change to join us in 
exploring ideas on how to move forwards.
Part of the purpose is of course to try 
and interest people in anarchism and the 
WSM.  But we also want a genuine 
exchange of ideas, something we also 
hope to gain out of.

11:30 
Introduction: Our experience of the last 
decade
A brief introductory talk about our 
involvement in struggle & some of the 
mistakes we have made that will 
hopefully draw out some lessons for the 
future.

12:00. 
The left: what went wrong?
The effects of the collapse of the left 
are visible all around us.  But why did 
that collapse occur, was it merely due 
to a set of bad decisions (& characters) 
or are their deeper flaws in the basic 
ideas and operation of the left.


1:00
 Lunch break

2:00. 
D.A.I.C. & T.U.F., Revolutionary 
politics and 'single'  issues.
In recent years we have been involved in 
two areas that showed limited success, 
but although they came to involve large 
numbers of people they then dropped 
back.  Is this an inevitable feature of 
such single-issue campaigns.  We 
obviously believe in the need for a 
revolutionary organisation, but what is 
the role of such an organisation in 
campaigns.  Is it worthwhile for 
activists to be involved in a small 
revolutionary group.

3:00 
Video: Revolution and counter revolution 
in the Spanish Civil War
Many people see no alternative to 
capitalism, or after the USSR see the 
cure as being worse than the disease.  
We take a break here to remind ourselves 
of a time when workers demonstrated 
briefly an alternative to capitalism, 
not just in terms of economics but also 
in the structure of decision making.

4:00 
How do we go forward from here
We have spent a lot of time developing 
the general ideas and methods of 
anarchism to todays situations.  This 
has been done not just from theoretical 
examination but also from our experience 
of applying anarchists idea and strategy 
to campaigns we have been involved with.  
>From this we have the start of an idea 
of how the left should be re-
constructed.  Here we want your opinions 
of the conclusions we have come to.
Andrew Flood

anflood@macollamh.ucd.ie
Phone: 706(2389)

