Anarchy: a journal of desire armed. #37, Summer 1993
INTERNATIONAL ANARCHIST NEWS
-includes "Anti-Fascist-Action Edinburgh" by Rachel Rinaldo; "The
Anarchist Scene" compiled by Jason McQuinn.

@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
Anti-Fascist-Action Edinburgh

 Anti-Fascist-Action has chapters throughout England and Scotland
and is probably one of the most active groups around these days.
They are dedicated to fighting fascists, such as the British
National Party (B.N.P.), and nazis, through propaganda and, if
necessary, physical confrontation. A.F.A. started the autumn with
a successful action in London, where they prevented hundreds of
nazi skinheads from getting to a Blood and Honour gig where the
band Skrewdriver was playing.

 I've been involved with A.F.A. Edinburgh for several months, but
they formed about a year ago. In that time, they've plastered the
city with stickers and graffiti (and wiped out B.N.P. graffiti), as
well as held gigs at the Unemployed Worker's Center, had stalls at
local clubs, picketed a bookstore for selling a book by a nazi
revisionist historian, and written letters to the local B.N.P.
members. A.F.A. Edinburgh and Glasgow were also at an annual anti-
racist march in Glasgow, which 25 seig-heiling B.N.P.ers tried to
disrupt. Most recently, we've put up posters all over town, with a
picture of local B.N.P. members and their addresses and phone
numbers, urging people to write nasty letters and harass them by
phone. A.F.A. members have been known to make annoying phone calls
to local fascists and nazi skins at odd hours of the morning.

 A.F.A. is an alternative to mainstream/liberal groups, most of
which won't even recognize the existence of fascism in Britain.
Groups like the Anti-Nazi-League are mainly fronts for various left
parties and do little besides carry placards at big demonstrations.
A.F.A. especially concentrates on rooting out fascism in working
class communities, the favorite recruiting place of the B.N.P. The
mostly wealthy fascist leadership targets disaffected youth in such
areas, turning their anger away from the establishment and towards
neighboring minority communities.

 Not surprisingly, A.F.A. gets a lot of criticism from the so-
called `left'. An editorial in the left University of Edinburgh
student newspaper called groups like A.F.A. "the violent fringe"
and "leftist thugs." Other groups within Edinburgh have sharply
criticized the anti-B.N.P. posters and our confrontational tactics.
But it is a pipe dream to think that merely by distributing
leaflets and holding demonstrations, the fascists will go away.
This kind of thinking on the majority of the left has fed the
recent rise in fascism and nazism in Germany, France, Italy, Spain,
and even Sweden, where Jewish cemeteries have been desecrated. Mass
demonstrations are important, but the reality of fascists on the
streets must be dealt with before they can terrorize the local
community and recruit vulnerable youth. -Rachel Rinaldo (from Love
& Rage).

@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
                      _The_anarchist_scene_
                    Compiled by Jason McQuinn

 EPHEMERA BUTTONS INC. (POB 490, Phoenix, OR. 97535) has a 16-page
button catalog displaying hundreds of designs and slogans,
including a few anarchist ones. Send four 29=9B stamps for a copy.

 LOVING MORE Annual Conference on Group Marriage and Expanded
Family will take place August 20-22, 1993 in Berkeley, CA. Contact
PEP (Box 6306, Captain Cook, HI. 96704; phone: 808-929-9691) for
more information.

 A DISTRIBUTION has moved to a new address at POB 2361, Landover
Hills, MD. 20784, and no longer distributes a retail catalog. All
sales are now wholesale, while requests for retail catalogs are
being referred to Perennial Books (Box B14, Montague, MA. 01351).
Send a 98=9B 6"x9" SASE for a copy of Perennial Books' large catalog.

 EXTREME BOOKS (POB 11704, Portland, OR. 97211-0704; phone: 503-
249-8090) has reprinted the first and only edition of the
Situationist International "review of the American section of the
S.I.," which was originally published in June 1969. This 46-page
review contains short critiques of socialist economists Baran &
Sweezy, critical theorist Herbert Marcuse and media-guru Marshall
McLuhan, along with other short texts of some historical interest.
Copies have a $4.50 cover price, but it's not clear if the
publishers are accepting retail orders.

 AN ENLARGED RANTS ANTHOLOGY is currently being edited by Adam
Parfrey and Bob Black, who are still looking for nominations or
submissions. "Although this was not, and will not be, an `anar-
chist' anthology per se...about 40% of the contributors [to the
original edition] were anarchists." Contact Adam Parfrey at: Feral
House, POB 3466, Portland, OR. 97208, or Bob Black at: POB 3142,
Albany, NY. 12203-0142.

 NORTHLAND POSTER COLLECTIVE (POB 7096, Minneapolis, MN. 55407) has
published a free Summer 1993 tabloid catalog of posters, notecards,
buttons and t-shirts.

 THE MID-ATLANTIC ANARCHIST GATHERING will take place from Friday,
July 30th till Monday, August 2nd in Philadelphia, PA. For
information on housing & setting up workshops, or to send donations
to cover the expected costs drop a line to: MA@G (POB 31889,
Philadelphia, PA. 19143).

 LEFT BANK DISTRIBUTION (4142 Brooklyn Ave. NE., Seattle, WA.
98105; Phone: 206-632-5870) has published a huge new 64-page Winter
1993 book catalog with probably the most comprehensive coverage of
anarchist and related titles available in North America. Anyone who
reads should have a copy of this catalog! The catalog is free, but
it would be nice to send a buck to help with postage.

 A DISTRIBUTION (84b Whitechapel High Street, London E1 7QX,
England; Phone/fax: 081-558-7732) has published a handsome 8-page
catalog of books on anarchist, feminist and situationist topics.

 LOOMPANICS UNLIMITED (POB 1197, Port Townsend, WA. 98368) has re-
leased another annual edition of its main catalog for 1993. With
over 800 books on unusual topics, this 280-page catalog covers
topics from cops to guns, bombs to sex and survival to sex.
Especially welcome in this edition is the expanded coverage given
to books on self-publishing, media and censorship, along with the
traditional section on "Anarchism and Egoism." Copies are $5.

 SOAPBOX JUNCTION (POB 597996, Chicago, IL. 60659) has released a
1993 Action Resource Guide containing a selection of alternative
press periodicals, pamphlets and books, including a variety of
anarchist titles. Also included are listings of zine and mail-art
addresses. Copies are $3.

 PHILADELPHIA SOLIDARITY (422 W. Upsal St., Philadelphia, PA.
19119), emerging from ten years of relative inactivity, has
released a 6-page catalog covering materials by Cornelius
Castoriadis and other anti-hierarchical socialist publications.
Send a 29=9B stamp for a copy.

 AUTONOMEDIA (POB 568 Williamsburgh Station, Brooklyn, NY. 11211-
0568) "is preparing an anthology of essays and possible visual
material for a book (and electronic media) on the issues
surrounding communications, intellectual property, work, and new
information technologies." Topics to be addressed include: "The
anti-copyright movement, State information control
mechanisms,...Class struggle on the high-tech front,...The politics
of mail art and free radio,...Electronic banking, digital cash, eht
end of `money',...Primitivism and the anti-technology
movement,...Surveillance & popular defense," etc. Send suggestions
for contributions ASAP, or write soon for more information. The
deadline for submissions is October 1st.

 A FEW BACK ISSUES OF ANARCHY: A Journal of Desire Armed (C.A.L.,
POB 1446, Columbia, MO. 65205-1446) are still available in bulk for
free distribution at the cost of postage & packaging. We now have
extras of several issues including #19, #20-21, #25 & #31, along
with a very few extras of other issues. For those living in the
U.S. we suggest you send about 10=9B to 25=9B each (depending on the
size of the issue[s] requested and your distance from Missouri) for
50 to 150 copies. (Unless you live in the Midwest - where postage
will be cheaper, send a minimum of $7.50, and make any checks out
to "C.A.L." only. Those outside the continental U.S. need to send
much more to cover the higher costs of postage.) All copies will be
marked "FREE" on the covers. To order bulk copies for resale, see
the terms listed in the box on page 2.

 If you have announcements concerning anarchist gatherings, new
publications, or other anarchist activities or projects which our
readers might find of use, you can send them to: Attn. Anarchist
Scene, c/o C.A.L., POB 1446, Columbia, MO. 65205-1446. Please
remember, for more information, or for ordering materials listed in
this column, you must write to the addresses given above and not to
C.A.L.


