The Covenant of Unanimous Consent

The following comes from a science fiction novel by the anarchist author
L. Neil Smith.  It is supposed to be a self-executing way of bringing anarchy.

--------------------------------------

A NEW COVENANT*

WE, THE UNDERSIGNED Witnesses to the Lesson of History - that no Form of
political Governance may be relied upon to secure the individual Rights
of Life, Liberty, or Property - now therefore establish and provide
certain fundamental Precepts measuring our Conduct toward one another,
and toward others:

Individual Sovereignty

FIRST, that we shall henceforward recognize each individual to be the
exclusive Proprietor of his or her own Existence and of all products of
that Existence, holding no Obligation binding among Individuals excepting
those to which they voluntarily and explicitly consent;

Freedom from Coercion

SECOND, that under no Circumstances shall we acknowledge any Liberty to
initiate Force against another Person, and shall instead defend the
inalienable Right of Individuals to resist Coercion employing whatever
Means prove necessary in their Judgement;

Association and Secession

THIRD, that we shall hold inviolable those Relationships among
Individuals which are totally voluntary, but conversely, any Relationship
not thus mutually agreeable shall be considered empty and invalid;

Individuality of Rights

FOURTH, that we shall regard Rights to be neither collective nor additive
in Character - two individuals shall have no more Rights than one, nor
shall two million nor two thousand million - nor shall any Group possess
Rights in Excess of those belonging to its individual members;

Equality of Liberty

FIFTH, that we shall maintain these Principles without Respect to any
person's Race, Nationality, Gender, sexual Preference, Age, or System of
Beliefs, and hold that any Entity or Association, however constituted,
acting to contravene them by initiation of Force - or Threat of same -
shall have forfeited its Right to exist;

Supersedure

UPON UNANIMOUS CONSENT of the Members or Inhabitants of any Association
or Territory, we further stipulate that this Agreement shall supersede
all existing governmental Documents or Usages then pertinent, that such
Constitutions, Charters, Acts, Laws, Statutes, Regulations, or Ordinances
contradictory or destructive to the Ends which it expresses shall be null
and void, and that this Covenant, being the Property of its Author and
Signatories, shall not be Subject to Interpretation excepting insofar as
it shall please them.

SIGNATORY:                             WITNESS:

_________________________________      _______________________________
signature                date          signature               date

_________________________________      _______________________________
name (please print)                    name (please print)

SEND TO: 111 East Drake, Suite 7032, Fort Collins, Colorado 80525. PLEASE
ENCLOSE TWO DOLLARS to cover processing and archiving. Add SASE for
confirmation of receipt.

* Excerpted from Chapter XVII of THE GALLATIN DIVERGENCE by L. Neil
  Smith, Del Rey Books (a division of Random House), New York, 1985, as
  amended by unanimous consent, October, 1986.

