SEKHMET - MAGAZINE OF THE ANARCHA-FEMINIST FEDERATION OF AOTEAROA

HOW WE STARTED
At the Anarchist Conference in 1991 anarcha-feminism was discussed.  From
the discussion two groups were established, one in Auckland and one in
Wellington. 

Here finally is issue 8 of Sekhmet - for all those who contacted us from
overseas requesting an email copy thankyou! It certainly is a new
development for us being able to get in touch with heaps of new contacts
from around the world. If you don't want issue 9 please contact us, hey but
don't hold your breath for it cause they tend to come out quite
spasmodically.  Also please note the following is not Sekhmet in it's
entireity, we've cut a bit out especially basic stuff like definitions of
anarchy etc. 

  SEKHMET
Sekhmet is the magazine of the Anarcha-feminist Federation.  The name of
our zine Sekhmet, is taken from Egyptian theology.  Sekhmet being an
Egyptian war goddess, we see Sekhmet as a good name for a magazine making
war with hierarchies.  Articles in Sekhmet do not necessarily reflect
views of the collective.  
 [continues in the original]

EDITORIAL
Kia ora!  Were in the middle of a Wellington southerly storm.  Despite the
icy rain its been an exciting week - the events at Wanganui totally
eclipsed more routine things! Nonetheless, Sekhmet VIII will be off the
photocopiers soon (we hope). We also nearly had a computer disaster. On
March 8, the Michelangelo virus wiped the hard drive of our computer! The
main casualty was our mailing list. This stuffed up our distribution, so
sorry a million times if you should have received this zine, and didnt.  
And please send us your address!

The Katipo Collective is still sharing an office with the Committee for the
Establishment of Civilization. Its on the second floor of the Blue Star
(formerly Sharp) building, so, if youre passing, check us out  at 264 Cuba
St.! There is now an anarchist bookshop, too! This is at 272 Cuba St.,
sharing space with the NORML shop, which has been totally refurbished. It
will stock lots of groovy anarcha-feminist books and pamphlets, along with
anarchist ones.  

The biggest thing we organized this year so far has been the Third Annual
Anarcha-feminist Conference, and this issue reflects this in being a
Conference Special! Were really interested in having more feedback from
wimmin on how the Conference went for them, so we can work out what we did
O.K., and what we could have done better. So have a rant, and send us your
letters! 

Also happening is the Womens Book Collective a group set up to put
together a book which documents some of the radical feminist thoughts and
actions happening in Aotearoa/New Zealand today. The Collective was
motivated to compile the book to combat the myth that feminism is becoming
a thing of the past. Yeah we think that is crap too so the Katipo
Collective responded to the questionnaire which forms the basis of the
book. Groups and individual women who are involved in working for change
are encouraged to be part of the book, so if you want to be included or
want more information ring Rozy Tunnicliffe on (04) 2928828, or Maria
McMillan (06) 350 4505  (work)  (06) 3595279  (home).For those who would
like to receive any information contact the Katipo Collective. Our postal
address is P.O. Box 14-156, Kilbirnie, Wellington.  The Katipo also meets
every Tuesday at the Sharp Building, 1st Floor, 264 Cuba Street,
Wellington. Contact  us on (04) 389-1231.                      ! 

***********************************************************************************

            	 SEKHMET
P.O BoX 14-156, Kilbirnie, 
Wellington, New Zealand 
E-mail : aaa@nubm.wgtn.planet.co.nz 

Sekhmet is produced by theKatipo Collective, an independent, autonomous
collective based in Wellington.  

Opinions expressed in this magazine do not necessarily represent the views
of the collective. 

Contributions of articles and pictures are always welcome. 


