ANTI-FA'S ARRESTED IN BERLIN.

On Monday the 15th November four
anti-fascists were  arrested in
Berlin, and the cops searched
several apartments  and are still
searching for more "anti-fascists".
Mehmet,  Abidin, Fatma and Erkan,
who are all Turkish, were charged 
with murder, aiding and abetting
murder, attempted murder and 
assault. The murder is the death of
Gerhard Kaindl, a high  rank member
of the "Deutsche Liga Fur Volk and
Heimat", a  right wing party trying
to unite other fascist groups.
Kaindl  was stabbed to death during
a meeting in April 1992. The 
federal police targeted the militant
Turkish-Kurdish group  "Antifa
Genclic" (Anti Fascist Youth).
Allegedly they  arrested the 4 on
the word of an informant who was
involved in  the action.
The cops raided apartments and
followed anti-fascists in  1992.
Later that year they claimed they
had abandoned the  investigation.
However the "Deutsche Liga's
newspaper  published the names,
addresses and pictures of several
people  they said had carried out
the murder. They also said that all 
the 8 people who'd killed Kaindl
were known to the police.  There
would seem to be a good channel of
info from the police  to the
fascists. (No surprise).
The reason behind the arrests and
charges is obvious: the  cops want
to attack the anti-fascist movement,
and one of the  most effective ways
to do this is identify
"ringleaders", i.e.  unashamed
anti-fascists, and get them sent
down for a long  time. The climate
of fear created by the arrests,
helped by  the media, is an attempt
to prevent political action,
frighten  people from doing
anything. This is topped up by
preventing  any solidarity with the
prisoners.
Anti-fa in Berlin are asking for
solidarity with the  arrested
comrades,
For more info contact: A.luers,
Grunteler Str 30 , 13357,  Berlin,
Germany, (Rote Hilfe ).

