Anarchy: a journal of desire armed. #37, Summer 1993
ALTERNATIVE MEDIA REVIEW part two
-includes "Heidegger's Nazism", a review by John Zerzan;
Alternative Press Books, short reviews by T. Otter, Joseph
Average, & J.McQuinn; and "Cointelpro revisited", a review by
Toni Otter.=20

@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
                       Heidegger's nazism
                      Review by John Zerzan

 On Heidegger's Nazism and Philosophy by Tom Rockmore (University
of California Press, Berkeley, CA., 1992) 382pp. $35.00
hardcover.

 Shortly after the death of leading deconstruction theorist Paul
de Man in 1983, it was discovered that as a young man in occupied
Belgium he wrote several anti-Semitic and pro-nazi newspaper
commentaries. This shocking news not only tended to call decon-
struction itself into question but its wider post-structural-
ist/postmodern orientation as well. De Man, deconstruction, and
post-structuralism in general have all been decisively influenced
by Heidegger, and this in turn has helped resurrect controversy
concerning the latter's affiliation with German National
Socialism.

 Martin Heidegger (1889-1976) is thought of by many as this cen-
tury's most original and profound philosopher. In 1933 as a
university Rector he declared his adherence to the Nazi Party.
Though this formal allegiance was short-lived, Heidegger never
denounced Nazism as an ideal; in fact, more than once he defended
its present and future potential, in slight distinction to the
actual record of Hitlerism.

 There is today a mini-industry of books and articles on the
Heidegger (and de Man) question, which is, at base, what is the
nature of the connection between a thinker's ideas and his/her
life
choices?

 Rockmore argues that Heidegger's political decisions were the
di-
rect outcome of his existential thought, grounded as it was in a
nationalist perspective. He provides, albeit in a rather over-
written, repetitive style, a very adequate general treatment of
Heidegger's philosophy and convincingly demonstrates, I believe,
that Heidegger's nazism was no mere contingency or accident.

 Rockmore also reviews all the literature generated by this issue,
which reveals, among other things, how resistant the largely
French
post-structuralist school has been to admitting a link between
Heidegger's ideas and his horrendous political positions. It is
worth repeating that post-structuralism, philosophical foundation
of postmodern culture, is nothing if not Heideggerian.

 Perhaps even more importantly, Rockmore raises the question of
the
validity or relevance of philosophy itself, given its
embeddedness
in advanced specialization. His question prompted me to note how
little independent philosophers seem to be from the political
cli-
mate they inhabit. Consider a few top `stars' of philosophy:
besides Heidegger reflecting the prevalent Nazi politics, more
recently we have Habermas, whose sterile technical rationalism is
very congruent  with  German  techno-capitalist-liberalism;
Derrida, whose rhetorical flourishes and lack of content mesh
with
a French political scene long on verbiage but devoid of movement;
and, in the U.S., Richard Rorty, whose conservative pragmatism
found prominence along with Reaganist retrenchment.

@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
                     Alternative Press Books
     Short reviews by T. Otter, Joseph Average, & J. McQuinn

GOOD SEX

 Good Sex by Julia Hutton (Cleis Press, POB 8933, Pittsburgh, PA.
15221 & POB 14684, San Francisco, CA. 94114, 1992) 222pp. $13.00
paper.

 Is it needless to say I got off on reading this book? And it
even
has a "Safer Sex Guidelines" appendix. "Haven't you always wanted
to have dozens of people - thoughtful people of varied and
distilled experience - get down to basics and just tell you how
they perceive their own sexual histories? Gratefully, here they
are." (back cover comment by Eve Kosofsky)

 Julia Hutton conducted over 80 in-depth, explicit interviews
with
people, ages 17-73, who view sex as a powerful, positive factor
in
their lives. Chapters include "Desire," "Fe/Male Trouble,"
"Sexual
Healing," and "Ecstatic Outlaws." Good Sex is a "fistful of
polaroids" of sex in the '90s. -T.O.

ANARCHY AND HISTORY?

 Anarchy and the End of History edited by M. Gunderloy & M.
Ziesing
(Factsheet Five/Lysander Spooner Society, POB 433, Willimantic,
CT.
06226, 1991) 144pp. $9.00 paper.

 ``Anarchy may not, as we are all fond of insisting, be chaos,
but
the anarchist movement and anarchist theory in this country are
certainly in a chaotic disarray right now.''
=FEMike Gunderloy, Introduction

 Because modern anarchism can trace its awakening to the
Enlighten-
ment, that period when issues of liberty, freedom, equality, and
community became central to vigorous, self=FEconscious political
discussion and action, it seems inevitable that it would have
blos-
somed into a complex array of perspectives and practices.

 Editors Gunderloy (formerly of Factsheet Five) and Ziesing
(Instead of A Magazine) address this multiplicity through a
collection of essays by various voices within and around the
anarchist presence today, all responding to initial challenges
posed by Gunderloy such as "What is an anarchist?" "What is a
government?" "How does an anarchist society work?" "Is anarchy
the
end of history?" - and so on.

 Ranging in insight and quality from lame to inspired, all essays
in the collection grapple with questions most basic to anarchism
today; at times certain writers bog down in dogmatic definitions
and positions, while others search for meaningful connections
between anarchist ideas and the realities of social
transformation.
Still others pose entirely new and relevant questions, such as
"Why
are anarchists so often elitist know=FEit=FEalls?" "How to reconcile
the gaps between personal life and political ideals?" "How to
work
for practical solutions without becoming Libertarian lobbyists or
democratic socialists?"

 Generally the conclusions to which the various authors arrive
are
relative and vague. This is by no means a work with patented
solutions or recommendations for the reader, who is left groping
for firm ground in lieu of once=FEfast convictions. If you seek
definitive answers to the puzzling conundrums of anarchism, this
book will disappoint.

 But I read this collection as a touchstone for further thinking,
reshaping, and action. Confusion about principles need not
paralyze
us in practice; in fact, as the essays suggest, we should begin
to
worry when we feel like we have all the answers. Skeptical at the
outset, I ended up appreciating this collection because it
stimulated thoughts and strategies of my own that will prove
useful. Moreover, there is a kind of solidarity in the search for
a viable anarchist presence, and Anarchy and the End of History
can
be a helpful signpost warning us that others are searching too. -
J.A.


ANARCHY 101

 Anarchy 101: An Introductory Anthology #1 (A-non, POB 664,
Station
C, Toronto, Ontario, M6J 3S1, Canada, 1992) unpaginated $1.00
pamphlet.

 This pamphlet is an anthology of reprints meant as "a sort of
political primer" on anarchism. It includes "Everything You Ever
Wanted to Know about Anarchism," an excerpt consisting of
chapters
1, 3 & 4 from Alexander Berkman's The ABC of Anarchism, Peggy
Kornegger's "Anarchism: The Feminist Connection," and an excerpt
from Franz Borkenau's book on the Spanish Civil War, The Spanish
Cockpit. While these may not be the perfect introductory articles
(everyone will have her or his own list), they are probably as
good
a start as you're likely to find for people wanting to learn
some-
thing about `traditional', ideological anarchism. (There is no
hint
of any contemporary or historical anti-work, anti-ideological or
anti-civilizational perspectives here, but then we wouldn't be
talking about anarchism, would we?) The publisher promises future
anthologies and is asking for contributions and criticism.
-J.M.

IMAGINAL RAVE

 The Imaginal Rave by Cinnamon Twist (Tribal Donut, 41 Sutter
St.,
Box 1348, San Francisco, CA. 94104, 1992) 40pp. $2.00 (cash)
mini-
pamphlet.

 Raves are, according to Cinnamon Twist, "the space-age tribal
youth ritual, the return of the dionysian energy that first
emerged
in '50s rock'n'roll and erupted in full force in the late '60s
with
the intertwining of music and psychedelic drugs."

 If raves need a theory to realize their radical potential, The
Imaginal Rave attempts to provide it. For those who see hope for
social breakthroughs in the mass spread of drug-induced, techno-
beat-intensified, communal dance parties, this is a must read.
For
those skeptical that ecstatic partying holds any potential for
shedding layers of stifling character armoring and social condi-
tioning, this won't help. You'll just need to be there when it
hap-
pens.

 The crux is Cinnamon Twist's succinct question: "And what if
dance
could be a modality of social change?" At least it sounds like
more
fun than most demos. -J.M.

VAMPIRES

 Virgintooth by Mark Ivanhoe (III Publishing, POB 170363, San
Fran-
cisco, CA. 94117, 1991) 192pp. $7.00 paper.

 Virgintooth is the tale of Elizabeth and her life as a vampire.
Her evolution and growth propel the plot, though I must admit I'm
not a fan of vampire stories.

 The novel can be read enjoyably as a vampire adventure, or, for
`deeper' readers, as an examination of life's paradoxes, illusions,
and difficult choices. If you're attracted to the Transylvanian
genre, here is a new twist. -T.O.

TELEGRAPH AVE. CALENDAR

 Telegraph Avenue Street Calendar 1993 by Ace Backwords (Twisted
Image, 1630 University Ave. #26, Berkeley, CA. 94703) $7.00.

 Ace Backwords' "Twisted Image" comic strip should be familiar to
Anarchy readers by now (if not see his strip in the letters
section
of this issue). His annual street calendar is just as creative as
his strip. Featuring photos of Berkeley street people - homeless
persons, agitators, artists and musicians - along with a bit of
relevant commentary, the calendar opens a window to a unique
slice
of local life. If you really need a calendar, this one is worth
considering. What it lacks in its B&W photo quality, it makes up
for in its down-to-earth subjects.
-J.M.

UPDATING THE IWW?

 What's New with the IWW? compiled by Rob Los Ricos (Self-
published, Rob Los Ricos, 504 W. 24th #81, Austin, TX. 78705,
1993)
unpaginated, loose-leaf pamphlet. No price listed.

 Through reproduction of excerpts from the Industrial Workers of
the World (IWW) Preamble, Larry Law's Bigger Cages, Longer
Chains,
Murray Bookchin's Remaking Society, Semiotext[e] and Anarchy,
along
with his own thread of cogent commentary, Rob Los Ricos has
compiled a compelling critique of aspects of IWW union practice
in
What's New with the IWW? Although there are certainly several
other
important grounds for criticizing the IWW's historical and
present
activities and strategies, Los Ricos makes a long needed start at
constructing a self-critique from within the union-building
milieu.
For anyone still adhering to fundamental anarcho-syndicalist
ideological assumptions, this pamphlet should be a welcome breath
of fresh air in the stale atmosphere of 19th century workerism
that
still prevails in most unionist circles. -J.M.

CONFRONTING COLUMBUS

 Confronting Columbus edited by J. Yewel, C. Dodge, J. DeSirey
(McFarland & Co., Box 611, Jefferson, NC. 28640, 1992) 217pp.
$24.95 hardcover.

 This excellent collection of essays on the Columbian legacy
deserves to be widely distributed, especially to schools and
libraries where it is desperately needed. Beginning with Howard
Zinn's "1492-1992: A Historian's Perspective," the editors have
selected a set of succinct, cogent essays that, when read, will
certainly help turn around the perspectives of even the most knee-
jerk supporters of Columbus' worldshaking invasion of Turtle
Island. Included are contributions from John Mohawk on
"Discovering
Columbus: The Way Here," Jos=82 Barreiro with his "A Note on the
Tainos," Verena Stolcke on "Conquered Women," Eduardo Galeano on
"King Sugar," James Loewen on the impoverished level of the
teaching of "Columbus in High School," William Bigelow's "Once
Upon
a Genocide: Columbus in Children's Literature," and Ward
Churchill's "Deconstructing the Columbus Myth," among others.
Although the Quincentennial, for which this volume was specially
prepared, has come and gone, the issues these essays address
remain
of the highest importance. For as long as our children are all
routinely taught a mutilated history which glorifies slavers,
torturers and mass murderers, how will we North American
descendants of conquerors and conquered ever understand our
actual
place amidst all the other cultures of this world? -J.M.

THE REALITY MANIFESTO

 The Reality Manifesto by Mickey Z. (Apathy Press Poets, 2924 E.
Coldspring Lane, Baltimore, MD. 21214, 1993) 8pp. $1.00 pamphlet.

 This little 8-page rant is subtitled "A Look at Pseudo-Life in
the
Post-Modern Age." It points out that "We've become spectators.
The
typical American no longer lives life, he experiences and watches
an image of life." But it doesn't do enough with this
realization.
One of the sub-headings points out that we are "United in
Isolation," but instead of advocating that we break through this
isolation, author Mickey Z. takes a cynical stance and argues
that
"image-making has reached the point where `fighting City Hall' is
tantamount to suicide." He instead urges that we "cultivate an
individualized lifestyle that enables us to avoid joining the
main-
stream, 9-t0-5 pseudo-world, we can seek our own inner peace."
This
is true enough on one level, but it can also be a rather pathetic
goal to refuse to challenge what disgusts us with this world.
-J.M.

COMPUTERS & FREEDOM

 Speaking for the Unspeakable performed by Bruce Sterling (Sweet
Pea Productions, POB 912, 1673 Happy Trail, Topanga, CA. 90290,
1992) 54 minute videocassette. No price listed.

 Bruce Sterling is the cyberpunk star of this videotaped session
from the 2nd Conference on Computers, Freedom & Privacy which
took
place in March, 1992, in Washington, D.C. Sterling successfully
portrays three archetypal characters inhabiting the fringes of
the
hacker milieu - at least in people's imagination, allowing them
to
speak their minds and develop their vastly different perspectives
at length. As "The Truly Malicious Hacker," as "Sr. de Policia
`X',
and as the Digital Black Marketeer, Sterling uses a minimum of
props and stage devices to maintain an entertaining one-man show
with some genuine content and bite at times, making this video one
of the more worthwhile I've seen of late. -J.M.

ALTERNATIVE PRESS TITLES FOR LIBRARIES

 APT for Libraries 1993 edited by Charles Willett (CRISES Press,
Inc., 1716 SW Williston Rd., Gainesville, FL. 32608, 1993) 102pp.
$12.00 paper.

 Alternative press books and periodicals are poorly represented
in
almost all library collections. It isn't just coincidental that
critical, radical and experimental publications remain unwelcome
in
many libraries while bigoted, religious, or otherwise reactionary
publications are often plentiful. Librarians can be as biased as
any other institutional bureaucrats when it comes to the
materials
obtained for their collections.

 However, in some cases alternative materials remain
underrepresented even despite the presence of more open-minded
librarians. In these cases librarians can often find it hard to
redress the balance due to several other factors: the political
climate, "public relations" and censorship pressures, or
administrative opposition. In addition, most alternative
materials
are harder to locate and obtain if only because most are
unavailable from the mainstream trade suppliers for the library
industry (who generally have little interest in stocking alterna-
tive titles that won't make them as much profit as corporate-pub-
lished titles). At the same time periodicals collections have
been
hit with massive increases in subscription prices by academic and
institutional titles that bank on the inertia of automatic
library
renewals to fatten their pockets. Despite the fact that this
greatly reduces the amount of money available to purchase
alternative titles, most librarians have quietly played along
with
this scam.

 In this generally miserable situation the nonprofit CRISES Press
has attempted to promote alternative titles by organizing
alterna-
tive press exhibits at each conference of the American Library
Association and by publishing APT for Libraries each year. APT
for
Libraries serves as an alternative press bibliography and
selection
tool oriented towards titles appropriate for "the general
reader,"
according to editor Charles Willett. The entries consist of
titles
chosen by the Gainesville Alternative Press Group from among all
those exhibited at ALA conferences by CRISES Press. A copy of APT
for Libraries should be in every library. If your local library
hasn't yet purchased a copy, it should be encouraged to do so.
The
existence of APT for Libraries means one less excuse for the
absence of the alternative press in library collections. It's up
to
all of us to work on eliminating the other excuses as well. -J.M.

NAMEBASE

 NameBase database constructed by Daniel Brandt and Steve Badrich
(Public Information Research, POB 5199, Arlington, VA. 22205,
1993)
IBM or MacIntosh diskettes $79.00.

 This has got to be one of the most important tools available for
assisting investigative reporting research concerning
international
intelligence, political elites, U.S. foreign policy, conspiracy
theories, counterinsurgency operations and corporate
manipulations.
With this easily mastered computer database it is a snap to check
on over 67,000 names of groups or individuals compiled from over
400 books and thousands of periodicals (143,000 citations). This
prodigious work of cataloguing enables users to ask for
references
to all names associated with a particular country during a
specified year (or number of years) and then read the entire list
within three minutes. Checking on Indonesia for 1975, France for
1968 or Israel for 1989 can be more revealing than a whole day
spent in most libraries.

 And among other features, the program can graph the distribution
of entries per year over the last sixty years for every country
for
which there are citations. Searches can be read on screen, sent
to
files or directly printed. Leading letter and phonetic searches
can
be done, and there is even provision for crosschecking for common
nicknames. The program currently takes up 2.2 megabytes of hard
disk space (though it can also be run on floppy disk-only
systems).
Update notices are provided after purchase of the database, and
updated versions of the database are available to users for half-
price.

 There is no question that NameBase ought to be available in
every
public library, and copies should be frequently used by every
author and every periodical doing serious investigative research.
Conspiracy theorists will love this database, but you don't have
to
be conspiracy-theory-prone to appreciate its incredible value. I
was actually shocked to see that it's offered for only $79.00,
which means that the publishers, Public Information Research,
truly
are providing a non-profit service. NameBase can't be too highly
recommended. -J.M.

OTHER TITLES RECEIVED

 A Goose-Step from Chains by Keith A. Dodson (One Tree Press,
3472
Bellflower Blvd., Long Beach, CA. 90808, undated) 30pp. poetry
pam-
phlet, no price listed.

 The Poor Man's James Bond, Vol.1 by Kurt Saxon (Atlan
Formularies,
POB 327, Harrison, AR. 72601, 1988) 477pp. $18.00 large format
(8=ABx11) paper. (See related review by Toni Otter under the title
of
"Survival for what?" in Anarchy #29/Summer 1991, p.7.)

 Educational AIDS unattributed (Plagiarist Press, 221 West Benton
St., Iowa City, IA. 52246, 1992) 12pp. mini-pamphlet (available
from publisher for two 29=9B stamps)

 Pr=82cis de L'Alliance Universelle (L'Alliance Universelle, 73
Avenue de la R=82sistance, B.P. 923, 83000 Toulon, France, 1992)
48pp. pamphlet, no price listed.

 Personal Recollections of the Anarchist Past by Georges Cores
(Kate Sharpley Library, BM Hurricane, London WC1 3XX, England,
1992) 18pp. pamphlet, no price listed.

 Clipped Coins by Constantine Caffentzis (Autonomedia, POB 568,
Williamsburgh Station, Brooklyn, NY. 11211-0568, 1989) 246pp.
$9.00
paper.

 Counterfeit Currency (Loompanics Unlimited, POB 1197, Port
Townsend, WA. 98368, )
pp Price? paper.

 War Tax Resistance: A Guide to Withholding Your Support from the
Military, 4th Edition by Ed Hedemann, edited by Ruth Benn (New
Society Publishers, 4527 Springfield Ave., Philadelphia, PA.
19143;
War Resisters League, 339 Lafayette St., New York, NY. 10012,
1992)
131pp. paper. No price listed.

 When Workers Decide: Workplace Democracy Takes Root in North
America edited by Len Krimerman and Frank Lindenfeld (New Society
Publishers, 4527 Springfield Ave., Philadelphia, PA. 19143, 1992)
308pp. $16.95 paper.

 Fear At Work: Job Blackmail, Labor and the Environment by
Richard
Kazis and Richard L. Grossman (New Society Publishers, 4527
Spring-
field Ave., Philadelphia, PA. 19143, 1991) 306pp. $14.95 paper.

 Putting Power in its Place: Create Community Control by Judith
Plant and Christopher Plant (New Society Publishers, 4527 Spring-
field Ave., Philadelphia, PA. 19143, 1992) 137pp. 9.95 paper.

 We Gave Away a Fortune: Stories of People Who Have Devoted
Themselves and their Wealth to Peace, Justice and a Healthy
Environment by Christopher Mogil and Anne Slepian with Peter
Woodrow (New Society Publishers, 4527 Springfield Ave.,
Philadelphia, PA. 19143, 1992) 182pp. $14.95 paper.

 The Political Poems by Michael Sheridan (Self-Published, MCS)
unpaginated, 8=ABx11 paper, no price listed.

 The Real State of the Union 1993 by Michael Sheridan (Self-
Published, MCS) unpaginated, 8=ABx11 paper, no price listed.

 Nu Wirdz by Michael Sheridan (Self-Published, MCS) unpaginated,
8=ABx11 paper, no price listed.

 Boomer: Railroad Memoirs by Linda Niemann (Cleis Press, POB
8933,
Pittsburgh, PA. 15221, 1990) 252pp. $12.95 paper.

 Duel in Peru: A 3-Act on the Shining Path by S. Colman (Dawn
Press, POB 02936, Detroit, MI. 48202, 1993) 125pp. $12.95 8=ABx11
photocopied in binder.

 Tekscourge by Derek Chisholm (Self-published, Derek Chisholm,
POB
281, Chattanooga, TN. 37401, 2nd Ed. 1993) 40pp. pamphlet, no
price
listed.

 Petersbourg by Michel Donnegan (c/o Actualit=82s, 38 rue Dauphine,
75006 Paris, France, 1993) 18pp. pamphlet, no price listed.

@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@
                      COINTELPRO revisited
                     A review by Toni Otter

 The COINTELPRO Papers: Documents from the FBI's Secret Wars
Against Dissent in the United States by Ward Churchill and Jim
Vander Wall, (South End Press, 116 Saint Botolph St., Boston, MA.
02115, 1990) 460pp. $16.00 paper.

 As Brian Glick writes in the preface, "The full story of
COINTELPRO [counterintelligence programs] has not yet been told."
But much information is available and Glick in War at Home and
Ward
Churchill and Jim Vander Wall in Agents of Repression have
recently
presented some of it. "What sets The COINTELPRO Papers apart,"
writes Glick, "is the number and scope of FBI documents it
reproduces."

 As Glick points out, COINTELPRO never ended. The concealment of
"post-COINTELPRO domestic counterintelligence action is part of a
broader effort to rehabilitate the U.S. political police. Central
to that effort has been a sophisticated campaign to refurbish the
public image of the FBI [...] The new directors have cultivated a
low-visibility managerial style and discreetly avoided attack on
prominent liberals. Anti-communism...has been augmented by `coun-
ter-terrorism' and `the war on drugs,' pretexts that better
resonate with current popular fears. The old myth of the FBI as
crime-busting protector of democratic rights has been revived in
modern garb by films like `Mississippi Burning' and the
television
series, `Mancuso, FBI.'"

 This repackaging of the FBI has fooled some people, but for
those
with eyes to see, Churchill and Vander Wall have painstakingly
presented a record which clearly indicts the FBI with the FBI's
own
self-incriminating documents. Their book covers the history of
FBI
attacks on the Black, Puerto Rican Independence, and American
Indian Movements, The New Left and assorted other radicals, and
the
Socialist Workers' and Communist Parties. Their account is
meticulously footnoted and replete with instructive detail.

 In the "Conclusion: COINTELPRO Lives On" the authors update the latest
FBI counterinsurgency activity directed against certain groups and
individuals. They also discuss the increasing incarceration of the U.S.
population, and such gulags as Marion and Lexington prisons. Churchill and
Vander Wall suggest, in part, as antidotes to police/FBI repression
"community control over local police forces, the dismantling of localized
police SWAT capabilities, the...elimination of national computer net
participation by state and local police forces, the abolition of police
`intelligence' units, and deep cuts in the resources...already allocated
to the police establishment.[...] Every judicial ruling...which serves to
[increase] police intervention...must be met with massive...outrage and
rejection [...] Energy must be devoted to heading off the planned
expansion of `control units' within every existing prison in the country."
(p.327) The authors include the following in their concluding remarks:
"The development of viable options to avert consummation of a full-fledged
police state in North America will require a deep rethinking, among many
who purport to oppose it, of priorities and philosophical positions,
including the near hegemony of pacifism and non-violence on the left. The
emphasis accorded confrontation with the police and penal systems will
have to increase rapidly... within virtually all groups pursuing
progressive social agendas, from environmentalism to abortion rights. The
fates of prisoners, particularly those...engaging in armed struggle
against the state, must thus be made a central concern [...]
understandings must be achieved that what is currently being done to
political prisoners and prisoners of war, in `exemplary' fashion, is
ultimately designed for application to far wider groups [...]; that the
facilities in which such things are done to them are intended to
eventually house us all; that the enforcement apparatus which has been
created to combat their `terrorism' simultaneously holds the capacity to
crush all that we hold dear or seek to achieve, soon and perhaps
irrevocably. In sum, if we do not move=FEand quickly=FEto overcome our
tactical differences to...confront `law enforcement' in this country, all
the rest of our... social preoccupations will shortly be rendered
meaningless by the very forces we have all too frequently elected to
ignore." (p.326)


