*** Welcome to issue two of Red & Black Revolution. *** 

The idea of revolution is central to anarchism.  In this 
issue we look at just what a successful revolution requires 
and in what conditions it is likely to occur.   We bring 
news of work being done now to build a new anarchist 
movement in Russia and of the links being forged between 
anarchist organisations in Europe.

Anarchism however does not sit and wait for the revolution.  
It fights today against all aspects of capitalist 
oppression.  This means working alongside people who do not 
share our world view but who do wish to tackle some of the 
worst aspects of capitalism.  We look at the way broad 
based projects,  aimed at combating the worst elements of 
capitalism can become part of the mechanism ensuring social 
stability.

Unions, community groups and unemployment centres all 
represent at least in part peoples' desire to fight back.  
Capitalism in recognising this has adopted two strategies.  
The earlier one was of direct attack, attempts to smash 
these organisations.  As capitalist control mechanisms have 
developed and the need for stability increased new methods 
have been devised, ones that aim to incorporate activists 
into the control mechanisms of capitalism itself.

So we have unions that argue for competitiveness, 
unemployed groups that argue for funding cuts and community 
groups in partnerships with the same companies that are 
devastating their communities.  Anarchists involved in 
fighting alongside fellow workers today have to be aware of 
where these problems arise and how we can start to tackle 
them.

             ********** Contents ***********

Incorporation

Why is it that many single issue campaigns and community 
groups which start out with a  radical program soon end up 
as little more than service groups?  Conor Mc Loughlin, an 
activist of the now defunct Portobello Unemployed Action 
Group investigates.

The road to revolution

A complete transformation of society, revolution, is the goal of anarchism.   
Ray Cunningham looks at what is meant when anarchists talk about 
revolution, and what can be done to bring it closer. 

Rebels at Ruesta

In August 1995 an international gathering of libertarian 
communists took place in Ruesta, Spain. A week of 
discussions took place and at the end a declaration was 
drawn up.  We present here extracts from the WSM  
delegates' report on the week and the agreed declaration.

Russian Anarchism: After the fal

Although many classical anarchist theorists and figures 
came from Russia, the advent of the Soviet State 
effectively crushed the movement.  Now anarchism is reborn 
in Russia.  Laure Akai and Mikhail Tsovma write from Moscow 
to tell us a little about the trials and tribulations of 
the new Russian anarchist movement.

Travellers fighting back

Patricia McCarthy examines the history of Irish Travellers' 
struggle for civil rights and ethnic recognition.  Their 
struggles have much in common with those of Indigenous 
people worldwide and with the struggles of Native Americans 
and Australian Aboriginals and also with the struggles of 
Gypsies, Travellers and nomads against racism and 
oppression.

Chomsky on Anarchism

Noam Chomsky is widely known for his critique of U.S. 
foreign policy, and for his work as a linguist. In a 
special interview with Red and Black Revolution, Chomsky 
gives his views on anarchism and marxism, and the prospects 
for socialism now.

The two souls of the trade unions

Union activists are facing new management attacks but the 
trade union leadership speaks only of partnership with the 
bosses.  Des Derwin, member of the Executive of the Dublin 
Council of Trade Unions and of the Dublin Private Sector 
Regional Executive Committee of SIPTU gives his personal 
view on the two souls of the unions.

The IRA cease-fire and republican politics.

The 'Irish peace process' is now well into its second year.  
It has brought respectability for Sinn FŽin but little of 
consequence for the Irish working class - North or South.  
Gregor Kerr, a member of the National Committee of the 
Irish Anti Extradition Committee in the late 1980s, looks 
at events leading up to the cease-fire and Sinn FŽin's pan-
nationalist strategy.

      *********** About the WSM  ***********

The Workers Solidarity Movement was founded in Dublin, 
Ireland in 1984 following discussions by a number of local 
anarchist groups on the need for a national anarchist 
organisation.  At that time with unemployment and 
inequality on the rise, there seemed every reason to argue 
for anarchism and for a revolutionary change in Irish 
society.  This has not changed.

Like most socialists we share a fundamental belief that 
capitalism is the problem.  We believe that as a system it 
must be ended, that the wealth of society should be 
commonly owned and that its resources should be used to 
serve the needs of humanity as a whole and not those of a 
small greedy minority.  But, just as importantly, we see 
this struggle against capitalism as also being a struggle 
for freedom.  We believe that socialism and freedom must go 
together, that we cannot have one without the other.  As 
Mikhail Bakunin, the Russian anarchist said, "Socialism 
without freedom is tyranny and brutality".

Anarchism has always stood for individual freedom.  But it 
also stands for democracy.  We believe in democratising the 
workplace and in workers taking control of all industry.  
We believe that this is the only real alternative to 
capitalism with its on going reliance on hierarchy and 
oppression and its depletion of the world's resources.

In the years since our formation, we've been involved in a 
wide range of struggles - our members are involved in their 
trade unions; we've fought for abortion rights and against 
the presence of the British state in Northern Ireland; 
we've also been involved in campaigns in support of workers 
from countries as far apart as Nepal, Peru and South 
Africa.  Alongside this, we have produced nearly fifty 
issues of our paper Workers Solidarity, and a wide range of 
pamphlets.  In 1986, we organised a speaking tour of 
Ireland by an anarchist veteran of the Spanish Civil War, 
Ernesto Nadal, to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the 
revolution there.

As anarchists we see ourselves as part of a long tradition 
that has fought against all forms of authoritarianism and 
exploitation, a tradition that strongly influenced one of 
the most successful and far reaching revolutions in this 
century - in Spain in 1936 - 37.  The value of this 
tradition cannot be underestimated today.  With the fall of 
the Soviet Union there is renewed interest in our ideas and 
in the tradition of libertarian socialism generally.  We 
hope to encourage this interest with Red & Black 
Revolution.  We believe that anarchists and libertarian 
socialists should debate and discuss their ideas, that they 
should popularise their history and struggle, and help 
point to a new way forward.  If you are interested in 
finding out more about anarchism or the WSM, contact us at 
PO Box 1528, Dublin 8, Ireland.

            ***********  Re-printing  **********

Permission is given for revolutionary publications to 
reprint any of the articles contained in this issue.  But 
please do two things

-> Tell us you are re-printing and send us a copy of the 
publication it appears in.
-> If you are also translating an article please send us a 
copy of the translation on computer disk so we can add it 
to our electronic archive.A complete transformation of 
society, revolution, is the goal of anarchism.   Ray 
Cunningham looks at what is meant when anarchists talk 
about revolution, and what can be done to bring it closer. 

         *********** Submissions ***********

Red & Black Revolution is published by the Workers 
Solidarity Movement.  The deadline for the next issue is 
June, 1996.  Submissions are welcome and should be sent 
either as 'text only' files on Mac or PC format computer 
disks or typed on plain white paper.  Disks are preferred.  
Letters are also welcome.  All correspondence should be 
sent to Red & Black Revolution, PO Box 1528, Dublin 8, 
Ireland.
