
DEMOLISH SERIOUSNESS

We call on all theorists to pour coke on their word-processors and cease
to think between January 3rd 1991 and December 31st 1994. Thought is a
virus let loose on the world by a self-perpetuating elite in order to
market paraphenalia of the thinker - books, paper, pens, art films, word
processors, whisky...  Intellectuals are the pet gerbils of the
bourgeoisie, fed and watered by them to demonstrate their essential
cuddlesomeness.  Thought creates the illusion that through activities that
are actually waste this civilisation is in touch with a "higher logic"
which gives meaning to its activities.  To call one person a "thinker" is
to deny another the equal gift of cognition; thus the myth of originality
becomes an ideological justification for the free market, mass culture and
cancer.

We call on all cognitional workers to recognise the materialist account of
the origins of thinking and admit their parasitic antecedents in the
traditions of monasticism.  As bodies surplus to production medieval,
cognitional workers were immured in the monaseries and employed in the
production of the ideology that producting ideology was on a higher plane
than producing food which in turn provided the theoretical underpinning
for the notion that producing nothing was higher still.  Only by breaking
free of the bounds of their social function and ceasing thought altogether
can cognitional workers hope to contribute to the movement for humanimal
liberation.

Thought - who needs it?  We proclaim the Thought Moratorium -a total
assault on rationality.  Millions of people have had a wank without ever
knowing what a syllogism is.  How can we think when some people don't even
have a hat?

The Thought Moratorium will be launched at The Festival of Stupidity at
galleries far and wide (24th-26th Dec.1990).  Events already planned
include short personal statements of bewilderment by several passers-by. 
The Festival will be immediately followed by a retrospective exhibition at
the I.C.A. entitled "Thought: Was It?"

DESTROY THE TRADITIONS OF THE DEAD GENERATIONS

_____________________________

(Originally published in Here & Now no.9)
