WIND CHILL FACTOR 9.1
end 1993
electronic version


Those of you familiar with previous issues of Wind Chill Factor
will find this unusual. Well, while we would love to be able to
publish on a regular monthly schedule, the reality is that we are
far too busy with our other projects, and the cost of printing
5000+ copies per issue on newsprint is prohibitive. So we did some
brainstorming, fretted and wrung our hands, and then stole some
ideas and decided on this:  In between our regular newsprint issues
(the next of which will be #10) which we hope to put out every 3
months or so, we will be putting out WCF Info-Bulletins, such as
this one which you are now reading.  These info-bulletins will be
numbered as decimals (ergo, WCF 9.1), and will be available in 3
formats: as a page in the local radical monthly rag Lumpen Times,
as a streetsheet distributed separately around the city, and as
this electronic newsletter for Internet & BBS distribution (request
it from thak@midway.uchicago.edu). 

Contributions, letters, hate mail, etc, are all welcome. We can
especially use $donations$! For further info on WCF, contact us at:
WCF, PO Box 81961, Chicago, IL 60681, U$A (312) 384-2991,   email:
thak@midway.uchicago.edu

Use those addresses to also contact: Collective Chaos, Anarchist
Black Cross--Chicago, Food Not Bombs--Chicago, Baklava Autonomist
Collective

Wind Chill Factor is a zine for ideas, action, news, anger,
creativity, and more.  The project is
anarchist/autonomist/anti-authoritarian in content, process, and
organization.


(MAL)CONTENTS , issue 9.1
1) Chicago's Kristallnacht
2) ALF Hits Chicago Fur Stores
3) Injustice In Brew City
4) Fetus Fetishists Fail Again
5) Help Suppress The Surge
6) San Francisco Food Not Bombs Under Attack
7) What Is Food Not Bombs?
8) Anarchist Black Cross (Chicago)
   -- Grand Jury Indicts The Denver 3
   -- The War Continues...And So Does The Resistance...
   -- Repression at Westville
9) Autonomous Zone
10) No Boys Allowed
11) Local Events


1) CHICAGO S KRISTALLNACHT
  On Tue. Nov. 9 we had an anti-fascist demo here in chicago to
coincide with other demos in Europe, etc. on the anniversary of
Kristallnacht, which seems to have been renamed pogromnacht [the
night Nazis went on a rampage, targeting Jews in Nazi Germany].  I
thought it was a positive thing over all but it also raises some
questions in my mind. It was cold and dark by 5:30 pm but about 35
folx came out anyway to demonstrate downtown in Daley Plaza across
from city hall.  No press, and no cops thought it significant
enough to grace us with their presence! We had banners and a
bullhorn for a free speech area.  The whole thing lasted about an
hour.  I can t help but think the whole thing is a bit
eurocentric...granted there are a few nazis running around the
south side, but racism in Chicago is much more institutionalized
and traditional.  It predates the nazi era and will probably be
here long fter the last skinhead has kicked the bucket or decided
on some new fashion trend...  Maybe we should remember the date in
1836 when the last Pottawattamie tribes were forced out of Chicago
after their so called leaders signed a bogus treaty...  Or when
Illinois militia fired upon Black Hawk s tribe as they flew the
peace flag, massacring hundreds of Native American men, women and
children with impunity as they tried to get safe passage to land in
Wisconsin.  This is Chicago s Kristallnacht.  More recently we had
a full scale race war for 4 days in 1919.  Whites invaded the black
ghettoes in cars of vigilantes shooting into homes randomly. 
Barricades were set up in self defense and much blood was spilled. 
I am interested in history becoming relevant again, but it seems
people are only interested in keeping alive history that they find
personally relevant.  This rant is something i d like to hear
people s opinions on, so raise your voice...
D.L. Lingg


2) ALF HITS CHICAGO FUR-STORES!
  This past weekend, Nov. 27-29, 4 stores that sell fur in Chicago
were targetted with incendiary devices.  Damage was done to
Marshall Fields , Carson Pirie Scott, and Saks Fifth Avenue, all in
the upper-class Loop shopping area.  A device was found & removed
from Nieman Marcus as well.  In all, 8 devices were found, with six
igniting.  The devices were set off when the stores were not open,
and were apparently geared towards setting off the sprinkler
systems to cause water damage.  There were no injuries. 

The Animal Liberation Front (ALF) released a communique to People
for the Ethical Treatment of Animals taking responsibility for the
action (we hope to have this soon), saying nine devices were placed
in four stores.  Police said no ninth device had been found.  The
ALF said the action signalled the start of a  more intense 
campaign of  economic sabotage against stores which sell fur .  The
ALF is currently under investigation by numerous grand juries
across the country in retaliation for their  Operation Bite Back ,
which is targetting the fur industry, and other actions.  At least
30 people have faced harrasment by being subpoenaed by these grand
juries, and 3 were temporarily jailed for refusing to testify. 

Police managed to recover two of the devices (consisting of
matchbook and timer attached to a 9-volt battery in a paper bag)
intact, and are making microscopic examinations for fingerprints
and other forensic evidence.  FBI spokesman Robert Long said the
agency would try to trace the items to the purchaser.  The ALF is
considered a terrorist organization by the attorney general, giving
the FBI jurisdiction.  Police also said they believe the devices
were placed by ALF members from out of state and that they may have
some success in tracking them because  there was some travel
involved.    

The Chicago Sun-Times managed to obtain parts of an ALF handbook,
which the bomb and arson unit had also obtained.  The Sun-Times was
shocked to find that the booklet not only gave directions on making
such devices but also on  how to carry out the mission and evade
police.   The Sun Times quoted sections of the booklet, including
some basic security tips.  They ended by quoting,  If questioned by
police, the handbook says  ...our first priority is to say
ABSOLUTELY NOTHING to the police, other than our name, address, and
date of birth.    They also carried an editorial condemning the
actions ( no one can justify tactics that endanger human lives and
destroy private property ), accompanied by a cartoon of Santa on
his reindeer-drawn sleigh dodging explosions and cursing  Darn
Animal Liberation Front! .  

Meanwhile, the liberal  environmental  Green Party issued a
statement condemning the ALF as a  twistd fringe group of animal
activists  and called  on all animal-rights groups to provide any
information that will lead to the arrest of individuals for the
plantation of incendiary devices.   We trust no one will listen to
the likes of apologist snitches like these. 

For more info on the ALF, grand juries, and counter-attacks on the
animal liberation movement, contact us or: 

North American ALF Supporters Group
PO Box 75029, Ritchie P.O. 
Edmonton, AB, T6E 6K1 Canada 

info from capitalist press 
  
3) INJUSTICE IN BREW CITY
  This is Bad Kid 007 reporting in for the revolution.  Check it
out. 

The unfortunate trend of cops unneccessarily killing black men in
Amerikkka continues. This incident, just another mark on the wall
of excessive force resulting in the death of Leonard Young, occured
in a not so  great place on a great lake  also known as Milwaukee.

  On Sept. 27th Leonard Young was pulled over by Milwaukee s finest
near the corner of 24th and Brown.  When he emerged from his car he
was shot 4 times resulting in his death by unfriendly officer Mark
Beutow.  Police reports say Young had a cassette tape in his hand
that was mistaken for a dangerous weapon.  The District Attorney s
office found the killing  justifiable homicide .   

  Following the killing the community began to organize.  Two
demonstrations and press conferences were held.  At the 2nd
demonstration Michael Mcgee (one of the prominent Black Panthers)
got on the mic and stated  enough talk, time for action .  About 20
people in agreement then turned over a Milwaukee squad car.

  The group that emerged after the killing to confront this and
other racial injustices in the city of Milwaukee is called the
Milwaukee Community Union.  On their 1st 
gathering at a local church they were harassed by the police. 
 Peacekeeper  Officer Beutow remains on the force in Brew city but
the community also remains on their intent to get justice.

  *For an update and more elaborate article look in upcoming issues
of Wind Chill Factor, the People s Tribune, the Fly Paper and the
Lumpen Times.


4) FETUS FETISHISTS FAIL AGAIN

Lifeless Christian zombies tried to shut down abortion clinics
across the city of Chicago in late November, but were foiled by
valiant pro-choice clinic defenders.  Operation Rescue and another
group known as TACK (teens against child killing) solemnly walked 
around in circles in front of health care clinics that provide
health services to many people including abortion. These paranoid
religious fanatics would walk around like sheep, blindly obeying
their God for 20 minutes until their rather large gray bus would
pull up to cart off our  Christian Soldiers  to the next clinic.

Fearless advocates of freedom jeered the boring Christian dullards
as they filed onto the bus one by one. At one point some Bad Kid
tossed a stink bomb onto the bus releasing a fragrance, similar to
the scent of  the decaying body of Christ s theology. The bus was
also tagged with  Jesus Freaks on board .

As the bus drove away, freedom lovers everywhere ran for their
vehicles in order to follow the ark of intolerance to the next
clinic. Where again they were met with the unrelenting forces of
justice. This round of clinic defense was as fun as the previous
clinic attack in early November, by Collegians Activated to
Liberate Life.  After spending more time then we cared to around
them, we found them to be about as liberating as being nailed to a
cross.  Their repressed inner-selves didn t find the humor we did
when Tim Murphy, a bigwig in the Pro-Life Action League, was
de-pantsed.  They didn t laugh about the 2 flat tires Tim s car
mysteriously acquiredgot either.  Nor when a car of gorilla-masked
guerrilas mowed  em down in a drive-by with a SuperSoaker.  But
that s ok, we didn t think the 20 or so fanatics who locked
themselves inside a clinic for 2 hours were humorous either.  But
their action was pointless, as all the appointments were
rescheduled  During all of this one can only wonder why they
continue to fight for a cause that is so lost? Our only answer;
shallow mindedness from inbreeding amongst their own.


5) help suppress the surge

there was a klan rally in indianapolis and i thought i knew where
i  was. i knew i was in a  country  built on genocide, theft of
land and  slavery. i also knew by this point that the government
ruling this land was  never one to deny those facts. now it was my
turn to witness it. 
 
 the knights of the ku klux klan were being protected by the most
well  equipped military this planet has ever known, in te name of
 freedom . there  were snipers on the roofs, SWAT looking guys
helping the nazis escape the  pissed crowd, and we had to go
through a metal detector to get into the area  that we would be
 allowed  to protest in. there was nothing we could do, the  klan
won the battle. we were controlled by the state to demonstrate in
a  fashion that would not threaten the klan. 
  
to drive this disturbing reality home further was the fact that
there  were black folks there who were not accepting our alliance.
they saw us as  betrayers according to the history of this
situation. there was nothing we  could say, nor should say in
regards to that. after all, the helicopters were  there to see to
it that no  real trouble  would break out. 
  
i remember having suggested the idea, not an original idea, of
having  some sort of way of identifying ourselves in terms of our
purposes in  indianapolis. somehow, it seemed best to wait and see
what happened if we  just showed up as is with faces covered. as it
turned out someone told us  that rumours were being spread that the
people with faces covered were the  aryan brotherhood and that we
should take off our masks. it seemed logical at that point that
some other means of identity was necessary, a patch or a sign  or
an armband. 
     
i was not able or ready to go to columbus, the klan s next stop, 
but i heard folks used some  sort of marking, and would like to
hear more about that. it seems very  necessary. 
    
the klan is laughing. the next morning the indianapolis star had
the  klan heading section  a  and dan and marylin quayle doing
section  b . a  very clear message regardless of who owns the star.
the klan and the quayles  side by side, smiling and gigging it up.
naturally. 
    
needless to say i went into an acute sense of denial for a couple
of  days. maybe it wasn t denial but it sure as hell didn t feel as
though i  belonged here. i didn t feel like i really had a land
that i called  my own .  i was pretty fucking pissed and it sure as
hell wasn t with black folks, or  jews, or gays, or lesbians or any
other people that these knuckleheads try to  blame for their own
ineptitude. it was the system that relies on this  ignorance to
fortify itself that i have always questioned.   
    
the more we talk about  constitutional  rights the more we prop up
this  illegal government for having claimed them. these rights and
privileges have  existed and been fought for long before the
constitution was framed, the fact  that we have to speak of these
things in legal and formal terms is enough  proof for me that we
are allowing them to escape us. 
   
all i desire to add at this point is that the prison society 
encroaches every human at this moment. more prisons and malls are
being built  at the moments that i write and you read this. the
prison society is on many  humans. 
identify. 

     raze in chicago 

addendum:  i would like to reiterate the fact that we are losing
the war against racism and deceit. here in chicago the police
torture and the wealthy want to develop the river. cabrini green is
a target for gentrification. we are witnessing a  recolonization .
at this point it is just an attempt. apathy and inaction is
complicity. 


6) SAN FRANCISCO FOOD NOT BOMBS UNDER ATTACK!

Quality of Life--a eighties kind of idea brought into the nineties
by a San Francisco mayor who used to be a police chief. Quality of
Life is a crackdown ordered by Mayor Jordan to arrest street people
for "nuisance" crimes. I don't really know what that means--maybe
trying to stop people in dirty clothes from peeing in public and
discouraging tourists from buying lots of usesless trinkets or
something.

A side effect is a chance for cops to arrest Food Not Bombs
activists and charge them with felony conspiracy. It seems that
there is a two-year-old injunction that the police have decided to
enforce which prohibits groups from serving free food in public
parks without a permit. But guess what, FNB can't comply because of
a 1990 Recreation and Park Department resolution denying permits to
any group distributing free food.

There have been 160 arrests of FNB members between Sept. 2 and Nov.
8. Often the individuals charged with conspiring together don't
even know their fellow "conspirators", as SF FNB has called
reinforcements in from East Bay and Santa Cruz FNB groups. The cops
have arrested over 400 homeless on "nuisance" charges, and continue
to arrest FNB members for serving free food, arrest homeless for
napping in public, all while San Francisco is under a federal court
order to relieve jail overcrowding at the downtown facility where
the activists were held. The city is fined $300/day for every
prisoner over the jail's rated capacity. Hmmm--how many people
could we feed for $300? The jail was 21 people over limit after a
Labor day FNB bust. 21 x $300 is, sing it with me, $6,300, that the
city has to pay Uncle Scam because it wants to improve the Quality
of Life for the city.

FNB contiues to serve 500 vegetarian meals a day between the Civic
Center Plaza and the eastern edge of Golden Gate Park, and I guess
things have calmed down somewhat, though the campaign against the
poor of the city continues. A supportive editorial in the Bay
Guardian reported on September 8 that two individuals on the Board
of Supervisors are taking action. Supervisor Angela Alioto is
working on legislation that would grant amnesty to Quality of Life
victims and Terence Hallinan is introducing legislation allowing
free food distribution without a permit.

There is a hot FNB debate raging on the e-mail network, so tune in,
and there will be a article in the WCF #10. 


7) WHAT IS FOOD NOT BOMBS?

Food Not Bombs is a 100% organic vegetarian food service group
committed to social progress and non-violent civil disobedience. 
FNB is dedicated to raising public awareness of homelessness and
poverty issues from housing to health.  We feel and have
demonstrated that a number of city issues have been unjustly blamed
on convenient scapegoats such as the poor, the black, the latino,
and the young underemployed.  There is a tremendous need for people
to discuss ways to elevate the status of the lowest among us, so
that we can all be liberated, for our liberation is woven
inextricably to the liberation of all.


8) ANARCHIST BLACK CROSS - CHICAGO 


Grand Jury Indicts the Denver 3

 To people with AIDS I say,  Find a higher grace in your
suffering.   --Pope John Paul II

Traditionally, the Roman Catholic Church has opposed equal rights
for lesbian, gay, & bisexual individuals.

In Colorado, the Roman Catholic Church was instrumental to the
passage of Amendment 2, a statewide amendment which allows for the
legal discrimination of lesbians and gay men.

Traditionally, the Roman Catholic Church has opposed the use of
condoms as a means for stopping the spread of AIDS.  Thousands
continue to die as a result of the Church s AIDSphobic policies. 
THIS IS WRONG!!

On January 14, a group of AIDS activists outraged by the Catholic
Church s homophobic and AIDSphobic policies draped plastic bags
bearing the word  AIDS  over tombstones in a Catholic cemetery. 
Their message painted a picture of what a cemetery will look like
in the not-so-distant future if the Catholic Church continues to
oppose the use of condoms to prevent the spread of HIV: a cemetery
in which tombstones relays AIDS as the cause of death.  Great care
was taken to ensure that no harm was done to any tombstone.

Eight months later, on the eve of the Pope s arrival in Denver, a
grand jury handed down indictments against ACT UP members Madrid
St. Angelo, Lorna Wheeler, and Taylor St. John, charging each of
them with two felonies and two misdemeanors related to the cemetery
action.  If convicted of these charges the Denver 3 could be
sentenced up to 15 years in prison.  Warrants with bonds of $50,000
each were issued.  The following day all three were arrested and
taken into custody.  Lorna, a resident of Los Angeles, was held in
jail for 15 days after which she was extradited to Denver and
allowed to post bond.  Madrid and Taylor, both residents of
Chicago, were held for nearly a week after which they bonded out
for the sum of $10,000.  In November, Taylor and Madrid were
extradited back to Colorado and taken into custody.  They need
$15,000 bond to be released.  All three have had their employment
jeopardized, the security of their homes threatened, and their
lives turned upside down.  Two of the defendants are HIV+ and could
lose their lives in the face of a prison sentence (a death
sentence).

What awaits these AIDS activists is undoubtedly a lengthy and
costly legal battle which unfortunately must be fought in
Colorado--the home of Amendment 2.  It is fair to say that the
Denver 3 will not get a fair trial given the political climate of
a state which has supported legislation based against lesbians, gay
men, and people with AIDS.

The Use Of A Grand Jury

A grand jury was used to divide the lesbian, gay, and AIDS activist
movement in Colorado.  Successfully, the state (prosecution) was
able to infiltrate, weed out, and gather testimony from members of
the gay and lesbian community to produce indictments against the
three ACT UP members.

During the past several decaes the grand jury has been used as a
means of political inquisition, a way to get activists in secret
rooms, ask them questions about organizations, demonstrations, and
civil disobedience.  People who refuse to testify are thrown in
jail in hope that they will become informants.  All activists need
to be aware of the threat that grand juries pose.  If you are
involved in political activism, direct action tactics, or civil
disobedience, you could be at risk.

Activists from around the nation have begun mobilizing so as to
lend their support to assist Lorna, Madrid, and Taylor in their
fight for freedom.  A legal defense fund has been established to
collect funds so as to aid these three individuals with legal
costs.  For more information, please contact the ACT UP chapters
below.  Please make your checks payable to one of the defense funds
listed below:

Legal Defense Fund
c/o ACT UP/Chicago
PO Box 579002, #275
Chicago, IL 60613  USA
(312) 509-6802

Freedom Defense Fund
c/o ACT UP/Denver
PO Box 9752
Denver, CO 80209  USA
(303) 643-4386

A PLASTIC BAG DOES NOT EQUAL 15 YEARS IN PRISON!

ACT UP!  FIGHT BACK! 
 FIGHT AIDS!



THE WAR CONTINUES ...AND SO DOES THE RESISTANCE...

Fred Hampton Jr. leads the National People s Democratic Uhuru
Movement for Self-Determination for African people in Chicago.  He
is a 23 year old African Political Prisoner in the U.S.  He was
sentenced to 18 years in prison on May 19, 1993 in Chicago,
Illinois.  Fred Jr. was kidnapped from the African community on
trumped up charges of aggravated arson.  Fred s real crime in the
eyes of the white power state is that he is organizing African
people for Self-Determination and democratic rights.

Since his sentencing, Fred has been whisked from prison to prison. 
Currently he is being held at Big Muddy River Correctional
Facility, which is 300 miles from his friends, family, and base in
Chicago.

Fred Hampton Jr. is the son of Fred Hampton Sr.--Deputy Chairman of
the Black Panther Party who organized the largest chapter in the
U.S.  Under Fred s leadership, the Black Panther Party organized
programs for black self-reliance such as the Free Breakfast for
School Children Program, Sickle Cell Anemia Program, and Free Food
and Clothing Program.  The City of Chicago, under the FBI directed
COINTELPRO, targeted Fred and theBPP as  the greatest threat to the
internal security of the U.S. since the Civil War.   Fred Hampton
Sr. was brutally assassinated, along with Mark Clark, on December
4, 1969 by the Chicago police and FBI.

CONTACT: NPDUM
Uhuru House
5409 S. Halsted
Chicago, IL 60609


Repression at Westville

"Human Rights Held Hostage  is a prisoners  Human Rights 
newsletter that was formed by politically active prisoners in the
aftermath  of the prisoners  hunger strike at M.C.C. (Maximum
Control Complex)  Westville, IN which was one of the longest
prisoner hunger strikes in U.S.  prison history. HRHH was put
together to enable politically active prisoners  in the Indiana
prison system to communicate with each other and reach out to 
educate people on the outside.  A small publishing staff on the
outside  collects the writing and mails them back into the prisons.
The newsletter is  now reaching and involving prisoners across the
country. This info is from an  account by Shaks Shakur, a prisoner
at M.C.C. who was one of the primary organizers of the  hunger
strike there in 1991 and the founder of the newsletter.  

On 11-8 Shak s cell was searched for a copy of HRHH.  When none was
found they searched 5 other prisoners cells then locked down the
entire cell block.  Spot shake downdowns of prisoners and staff
were conducted, and on 11-9 all the cell block was again searched
and this time ALL political essays with pictures (like the HRHH
format) were confiscated.   This resulted in all HRHH back issues
being taken, as well as many personal typed writings, legal
materials, etc.   This is an unprecedented move to sweep for a
publication. 

The attack on HRHH did not come as a big surprise, considering it
was starting to take root among many New Afrikan prisoners.  This
attack must be resisted, because if they can launch such an
offensive against a political publication and get away with it,
then it s only a  matter of time before they move on other
publications.  The Prisoners are requesting support and considering
filing a class action lawsuit.  Contact Shaka Shakur #28443  M.C.C.
P.O. Box 557 Westville, IN 46391-0557 or  the HRHH Staff P.O. Box
14075 Chicago, IL 60614-0075.    

Send letters protesting the sweep to below listed officials: 

Christian Debruyn, Commissioner  I.D.O.C.  804 State Office
Building  100 North Senate AVe.  Indianapolis, IN 46204  phone:
(317)-232-5715  fax: (317)-232-6798 
Charles Wright, Supt.  Maximum Kontrol Komplex  P.O. Box 557 
Westville, IN 46391-0557  ph: (219)-785-2554 



9) AUTONOMOUS ZONE

One method I d like to see experimented with is large spaces rented
by a few or more people... (to) provide space for everything from
printshops, organizing centers, soup kitchens and spaces for
fundrazors, all in one space. .. if 4-6 people get a large
warehouse space, furnish it & put some time in, space could be
provided for such a purpose for next to nothing... if even one
space like this could be used efficiently, in a multifaceted way,
run collectively, with no decision making apparatus used except
that which is determined by the needs of this starved society and
the limits of the geography... 

That is an excerpt from an article that was written in the last
issue of WCF. about 3 mo s before we knew we were leaving our old
collective space Chaos House (sobs and wailing), and the concept of
attempting an info-shop was being approached with caution. I didn t
come close to realizing that I was describing something that I
would become a part of in a year. The Autonomous Zone is open and
we are still proceeding with caution. Caution is good. No need to
rush into anything, right?

Well there are several projects running out of the space right now
and we encourage anyone to come check it out, contribute and find
ways to empower themselves, their neighbors, and the community at
large. This is not a simple society that we live in and any enclave
you can find is a good one, as long as it doesn t contribute to the
alienation. We want to free ourselves of the dependence on the
patriarchal, authoritarian structure of this society be it
corporate, governmental, religious or otherwise. We want to
encourage that locally, and support it globally. 

Recovery Alliance, a HIV risk reduction and recovery outreach
program has been doing training and focus groups here, and may soon
be doing their syringe exchange program here as well.  Centros
Beneficios, another HIV and SIDA awareness project that is
interactive and taught in spanish also meets here.  Other groups
like Anti-Racist Action, the Industrial Workers of the World, and
the Coalition for Positive Sexuality have used our space as well. 
Chicago has recently been introduced to Food Not Bombs, a
decentralized project that seeks to feed anyone who is hungry to
free vegetarian food and possibly even show folks cooperative and
healthy food-getting alternatives.  There is also Yoga with Aloma,
and occasionally computer & internet classes! In December the JAM
Crew will start hosting dope hip-hop parties.  We will also be
having speakers from time to time. The Autonomous Revolution Forum
Series (ARFS), an open-ended series of discussions will be just
plain rad.

Check the Events Calendar  for the minor details like times and
dates. 

Some of the projects we will hope to start soon include a new and
revamped return of Thinking Faction that we ll probably do with our
new Lumpen Pals. We want to start several informal class offerings
as well, the topics are varied and will alwas be free. We needyour
ideas for this. 

The Autonomous Zone Free School would like to offer: Spanish; Yoga;
G.E.D.; First Aid; Self-Defense; Theater; Creative Writing;
Quilting Bee-In; Secret Chicago History; English as a Second
Language; Confronting Police Violence; Printmaking; Drawing;
Homewbrewing; Graffitti Art; Music; Kropotkin's  Mutual Aid ;
Computers; Self-Publishing;  The Technological Society ; Wild
Edible Plants Foraging...and so much more.   We re looking for folx
interested in teaching and/or participating in classes starting in
January.  Give us a call!

There are also big walls in here with lists of things and posters
of demos and events. There is a Library, that s right, you can
borrow a book, just like downtown! Lot s of free stuff too:
leftover Food Not Bombs food; clothes; books; coffee; lots-o-zines.
We are out of control with FREEDOM.   Radical literature and
alternative music up the wazoo. 

You can find an article in this info-bulletin about the Womyn's
(Only) Space on Sunday nights.

There will be as many descriptions of this place as people that you
ask so you have to come see it, ok? It has grown out of necessity
as well as desire. We are trying to interact with our community and
make this a true com munity center. We have lots of new friends and
alliances and we want to be a part of creating
counter-institutions.  We welcome you to visit and hopefully
participate.  

AUTONOMOUS ZONE 1726 W. Division  (2 blocks W of Division L on
O Hare line) (312) 384-2991 -- Call for info, updates on events, or
just to chat.-sedov trevor lucien, proceeding with caution-


10) NO BOYS ALLOWED

Since nearly the beginning of recorded history, wimmin have had to
deal with a patriarchal society in which their voices have largely
been lost.  And since the start of  law , and  government , their
opinions have been received with derision, or a light little pat on
the head or a conciliatory chuckle, if they were received at all. 
So with centuries of socialization, and generations of learned
behavior, wimmin have been  taught  that their opinions and
feelings are less important than a man s and should be repressed. 
What we here at the Autonomaus Zone have been working to create is
a space where any womyn can feel comfortable expressing her
thoughts, feelings, or ideas without men around, and therefore
without the almost unconscious fear of censure.   So every Sunday,
from 7 pm until close, we have a space in which wimmin can, if they
so choose, participate in discussions, book readings,
conversations, potlux and companionship.  Or simply use it as a
place to read in peace if they so desire. Suggestions for other
activities are always welcome, and will serve to make wimmin s
night the truly diverse and supportive place it is meant to be.  So
wimmin, come on in, and share your ideas and tasty vegetarian
dishes.
Thanx, love eaty
 

11) UPCOMING EVENTS 

Every Saturday: Clinic Defense at American Women s Medical Center,
7am-noon, corner of Western & Diversey.  Join us against the
anti-choice bigots!
Every Sunday: Wimmin s Space: 7pm-Midnight at the A-Zone, 1726 W.
Division.  Bring food.  WIMMIN ONLY!
Every Thursday:  FOOD NOT BOMBS serving free vegetarian food, 2pm,
at the A-Zone 1726 W. Division.
Now  til Dec. 24:  Holiday Sale at the Gallery/Store of the
National Committee to Free Puerto Rican POW s and Political
Prisoners, 1112 N. California.  (312) 278-0885.  Hours M-F 2-5, Sat
12-4.
Dec. 18 (Sat): A-Zone Benefit with the Jaks, Think & Da Bad Kidz
(radical rap), and the Grussors (hip hop), and possibly more.  With
open mike & vegetarian potluck!  8pm.
 Dec. 21 (Tue):  ARF on INFOSHOPS AND AUTONOMOUS COMMUNITY CENTERS,
featuring a slideshow on Rosebud Commons in Portland by Squirrel,
and hopefully other Midwest infoshop-center activists as well. 
7pm, at the A-Zone, 1726 W. Division.
Jan 12 (Wed): ARF on PRACTICAL STRATEGY FOR ANTI-AUTHORITARIAN
REVOLUTION, with speakers (from several different viewpoints,
including anarcho-syndicalists, feminists, autonomists, and others)
and discussion.  7pm, at the A-Zone.
Jan. 26 (Wed):  ARF on Feminism, details tba.
Future:  ARFs on Prisoner Support & Prison Issues, and a series on
Revolution in West-Town, spotlighting Gentrification, Housing,
Gangs, Confronting Police Violence, and more!

Note: Phone first!  Events subject to constant change.




END, Wind Chill Factor 9.1

