CONTRAFLOW WINTER 93/94

THOUSANDS OF EMPTIES

According to the Empty Homes Agency there were 867300 empty homes in England in
1993 (though this probably includes squats) 

The vast majority are private with a rise to 764000 followed by councils on
70000 (down 39% in ten years - their total stock is down 23%) Housing
Associations on 17500 and central government on 15800 (nearly 11000 being MoD
married quarters).
London councils have a higher rate of empties (up to 9.2%) than the average
(1.9%). And all this is just what they consider homes ie not including
cathedrals. Council recognised homeless households (the tip of the iceberg) were
at 142000 in 92. Don't let the homeless rot, squat. 

SQUEEGEE LIBERATION 

John Major's rant against the homeless seems to have been picked up from the
antics of the new pig regime in New York. The election of mayor Giuliani has a
given a sgnal for Metro cops to start arrests on begars and peddlers giving out
stupid leaflets to discourage people from handing over money and for the cops to
lay into the squeegee people - homeless people washing car windscreens. ACT UP
who tried handing in a list of demands to the new bossman on his first day (the
pig thought it was more important to open the stock exchange) have been holding
solidarity squeegee protests with some getting nicked for it. Another 5 got
nicked on a memorial march for Terry Taylor homeless fighter who died in
October..... the charge sheets go on and on. But the mayor doesn't think he
needs an excuse to round up homeless people. When told that his closure of
shelters would put more people on the streets he replied that it was OK as
they'd be nicked for assault - Your definition of assault is different from
mine.I consider it assault when someone feels threatened. 

Meanwhile also in New York following on from the repression of the homeless in
the Lower East Side/Tompkins Square Park area that's been going on for a number
of years police have now banned anyone selling anarchist books in the East
Village. Local anarchists held an all-day protest demo with banners and music
which was finally attacked by the opcs with clubs masks and teargas.The protests
are set to continue. There are also moves to evict the ABC NO RIO anarcho-punk
centre which has been going for years. 

