                         Remote Mind Control Technology
                                 by Anna Keeler

Reprinted from SECRET AND SUPPRESSED: BANNED IDEAS AND HIDDEN
HISTORY, edited by Jim Keith, $12.95, available from
1-800-680-INET.

    There had been an ongoing controversy over health effects of
electromagnetic fields (EMF) for years (e.g., extremely low
frequency radiation and the Navy's Project Seafarer; emissions of
high power lines and video display terminals; radar and other
military and industrial sources of radio frequencies and
microwaves, such as plastic sealers and molders.)  Less is known
of Department of Defense (DOD) and Central Intelligence Agency
(CIA) interest in anti-personnel applications of the invisible
energies.  The ability of certain parameters of EMF to cause
health effects, including neurological and behavioral
disturbances, has been part of the military and CIA arsenal for
years.

    Capabilities of the energies to cause predictable and
exploitable effects or damages can be gleaned from discussion of
health effects from environmental exposures.  Interestingly, some
scientists funded by the DOD or CIA to research and develop
invisible electromagnetic weapons have voiced strong concern
(perhaps even superior knowledge or compensatory to guilt) over
potentially serious consequences of environmental exposures.

    Eldon Byrd who worked for Naval Surface Weapons, Office of
Non-Lethal Weapons, was commissioned in 1981 to develop
electromagnetic devices for purposes including "riot control,"
clandestine operations and hostage removal.  In the context of a
controversy over reproductive hazards to Video Display Terminal
(VDT) operators, he wrote of alterations in brain function of
animals exposed to low intensity fields. Offspring of exposed
animals "exhibited a drastic degradation of intelligence later in
life... couldn't learn easy tasks... indicating a very definite
and irreversible damage to the central nervous system of the
fetus."   With VDT operators exposed to weak fields, there have
been clusters of miscarriages and birth defects (with evidence of
central nervous system damage to the fetus).  Byrd also wrote of
experiments where behavior of animals was controlled by exposure
to weak electromagnetic fields.  "At a certain frequency and
power intensity, they could make the animal purr, lay down and
roll over."

    Notorious Jose Delgado, advocate of a psycho-civilized
society through mind control, no longer implants electrodes in
the brains of mental patients and prisoners; he now induces
profound behavioral changes (hyper-activity, passivity, etc.) by
exposing animals to precisely tuned EMFs.  He has also written of
genetic damage produced by weak EMF fields, similar to those
emitted by VDTs.  Invariably, brain tissue damage and skeletal
deformation was observed in new born chicks that had been
exposed.  He was concerned enough to check emissions from the
appliances in his kitchen.

    Ross Adey induces calcium efflux in brain tissue with low
power level fields (a basis for the CIA and military's "confusion
weaponry") and has done behavioral experiments with radar
modulated at electroencephalogram (EEG) rhythms.  He is
understandably concerned about environmental exposures within 1
to 30 Hz (cycles per second), either as a low frequency or an
amplitude modulation on a microwave or radio frequency, as these
can physiologically interact with the brain even at very low
power densities.

                                   Microwaves

    Microwave health effects is a juncture where Department of
Defense and environmental concerns collide and part ways.

    Security concerns, according to Sam Koslov of Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), first prompted U.S.
study of health effects of low intensity (or non-thermal)
microwaves.  At times, up to 70-80% of the research was funded by
the military.  From 1965 to 1970, a study dubbed Project Pandora
was undertaken to determine the health and psychological effects
of low intensity microwaves, the so-called "Moscow signal"
registered at the American Embassy in Moscow.  Initially, there
was confusion over whether the signal was an attempt to activate
bugging devices or for some other purpose.  There was suspicion
that the microwave irradiation was being used as a mind control
system.  CIA agents asked scientists involved in microwave
research whether microwaves beamed at humans from a distance
could affect the brain and alter behavior.  Dr. Milton Zarat who
undertook to analyze Soviet literature on microwaves for the CIA,
wrote: "For non-thermal irradiations, they believe that the
electromagnetic field induced by the microwave environment
affects the cell membrane, and this results in an increase of
excitability or an increase in the level of excitation of nerve
cells.  With repeated or continued exposure, the increased
excitability leads to a state of exhaustion of the cells of the
cerebral cortex."

    Employees first learned of the irradiation ten years after
Project Pandora began.  Before that, information had been
parcelled out on a strict "need to know" basis, which excluded
most employees at the compound.  Due to secrecy, and probably
reports like Dr. Zaret's, Jack Anderson speculated that the CIA
was trying to cover up a Soviet effort at behavior modification
through irradiation of the U.S. diplomats, and that the cover up
was created to protect the CIA's own mind control secrets.

    Finally, an unusually large number of illnesses were reported
among the residents of the compound.  U.S. Ambassador Walter
Stoessel developed a rare blood disease similar to leukemia; he
was suffering headaches and bleeding from the eyes.  A source at
the State Department informally admitted that excessive radiation
had been leaking from his telephone; an American high frequency
radio transmitter on the roof of the building had, when
operating, induced high frequency signals well above the U.S.
safety standard through the phones in the political section, as
well as in lines to Stoessel's office.  No doubt, National
Security Agency or CIA electronic devices also contributed to the
electromagnetic environment at the embassy, although values for
these were never released, as they are secret.  Stoessel was
reported as telling his staff that the microwaves could cause
leukemia, skin cancer, cataracts and various forms of emotional
illness.  White blood cell counts were estimated to be as high as
40% above normal in one third of the staff, and serious
chromosome damage was uncovered.

    The Soviets began research on biological effects of
microwaves in 1953.  A special laboratory was set up at the
Institute of Hygiene and Occupational Diseases, Academy of
Medical Sciences.  Other labs were set up in the U.S.S.R. and in
Eastern Europe that study both effects of microwaves and low
frequency electromagnetic radiation.  

    Years ago, in the halls of science, complaints could be heard
that Soviet experiments regarding bio-effects couldn't be
duplicated due to insufficient details in their scientific
literature, although, according to one DOD official, 75% of the
U.S. papers on the subject carried insufficient parameters for
duplication.  Scientists even questioned, with McCarthy like
sentiments, whether the Soviets were attempting to frighten or
disinform with false scientific reporting of bio-effects.  It was
unthinkable, according to cruder scientific theory, that
non-thermal levels of microwaves could cause harm.  Impetus for a
study of such effects came not from concern for the public, but
rather in the military and intelligence community's suspicion of
the Soviets, and their equally strong interest in developing
exploitable anti-personnel effects - an interest that continues
unabated today.

    The CIA and DOD "security" concerns metamorphosized into
research and development of invisible weapons capable of
impacting on health and psychological processes.  In fact, due to
the finding of startling effects, DARPA's security became even
tighter, and a new code name - "Bizarre" - was assigned to the
project.  

                            Military Disinformation

    Scientist Allen Frey of Randomline, Inc. was always more
interested in low intensity microwave hazards: thermal effects
were known.  During Project Pandora, the Navy funded such
projects of his, as how to use low average power intensities, to:
induce heart seizures; create leaks in the blood brain barriar,
which would allow neurotoxins in the blood to cross and cause
neurological damage or behavioral disorders; and how to produce
auditory hallucinations or microwave hearing, during which the
person can hear tones that seem to be coming from within the head
or from directly behind it.  

    In 1976, the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) released a
report in which they attributed the results of Dr. Frey's studies
to the Soviets.  According to Dr. Frey, who acknowledges that his
work was misattributed, he had thought up the projects himself. 
The DIA, but not the CIA, is allowed to use "mirror imaging" and
"net assessment" in their reports, ie., respectively, the
attribution of one's own motives and weapons capabilities to "the
other side", in this case, the Soviets.  It follows, that there
is nothing to prevent them from releasing a report prepared in
this manner, and thus muddy the water of decision making, pervert
public opinion, stoke up congressional funding or enlist the
support of naive scientists to counter "the threat".  There was
strong convern over CIA disinformation abroad, leaking back to
the home front, through the American press, but apparently the
DIA, at least on some issues, can dish it up with impunity.

    Dr. R.O. Becker, twice nominated for the Nobel prize for his
health work in bio-electromagneticsm, was more explicit in his
concern over illicit government activity.  He wrote of "obvious
applications in covert operations designed to drive a target
crazy with "voices."  The 1976 DIA report also credits the
Soviets with other capabilities, stating, "Sounds and possibly
even words which appear to be originating intercranially can be
induced by signal modulations at very low power densities."  Dr.
Sharp, a Pandora researcher at Walter Reed Army Institute of
Research, some of whose work was so secret that he couldn't tell
his boss, conducted an experiment in which the human brain has
received a message carried to it by microwave transmission. 
Sharp was able to recognize spoken words that were modulated on a
microwave carrier frequency by an "audiogram", an analog of the
words' sound vibrations, and carried into his head in a chamber
where he sat.

    Dr. James Lin of Wayne State University has written a book
entitled, Microwave Auditory Effects and Applications.  It
explores the possible mechanisms for the phenomenon, and
discusses possibilities for the deaf, as persons with certain
types of hearing loss can still hear pulsed microwaves (as tones
or clicks and buzzes, if words aren't modulated on).  Lin
mentions the Sharp experiment and comments, "The capability of
communicating directly with humans by pulsed microwaves is
obviously not limited to the field of therapeutic medicine."

    What is frightening is that words, transmitted via low
density microwaves or radio frequencies, or by other covert
methods, might be used to create influence.  For instance,
according to a 1984 U.S. House of Representatives report, a large
number of stores throughout the country use high frequency
transmitted words (above the range of human hearing) to
discourage shoplifting.  Stealing is reported to be reduced by as
much as 80% in some cases.  Surely, the CIA and military haven't
overlooked such useful technology.

    Dr. Frey also did experiments on reduction of aggression. 
Rats who were accustomed to fighting viciously when their tails
were pinched, accepted the pinching with relative passivity when
irradiated with pulsed microwaves in the ultra high frequency
rage (UHF) at a power density of less than 1,000 microwatts/cm^2. 
He has also done low intensity microwave experiments degrading
motor coordination and balance.  When asked about weapons
applications of his work, he answered by referring to himself as
"just a biological theorist", and his work for the Navy, "basic
medical research."

                              Lies Before Congress

    In 1976, George H. Heilmeier, director of Defense Advances
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) responded to a mailgram to
President Ford from Don Johnson of Oakland, paraphrasing
Johnson's concern, and assuring him that the DARPA sponsored
Army/Navy Pandora experiments were "never directed at the use of
microwaves as a surveillance tool, nor in a weapons concept." 
Don Johnson lingered in the memory of one DOD official who
sponsored microwave research in the 1970s.  Johnson was
enigmatically described as "brilliant... schizophrenic... he knew
too much... a former mental patient... buildings where work was
done."  (Scientists who have disagreed with the DOD on health
effects of microwaves and on the U.S. exposure standard, have
received scant more respect and have had their funding cut.)

    The next year, Heilmeier elaborated in a written response to
an inquiry before Congress.  "...This agency [DARPA] is not aware
of any research projects, classified or unclassified, conducted
under the auspices of the Defense Department, now ongoing, or in
the past, which would have probed possibilities of utilizing
microwave radiation in a form of what is popularly known as 'mind
control.'  We do not foresee the development, by DARPA of weapons
using microwaves and actively being directed toward altering
nervous system function or behavior.  Neither are we aware of any
of our own forces... developing such weapons..."
    
                                  Lies Exposed

    Finally, memoranda were released that rendered the goals of
Pandora transparent.  Richard Cesaro, initiator of Pandora and
director of DARPA's Advanced Sensor program, justified the
project in that "little or no work has been done in investigation
of the subtle behavioral changes which may be evolved by a
low-level electromagnetic field."  Researchers had long ago
established that direct stimulus of the brain could alter
behavior.  The question raised by radio frequencies - microwaves
or radio frequencies of the UHF or VHF band - was whether the
electromagnetic could have a similar effect at very low levels. 
Pandora's initial goal: to discover whether a carefully
constructed microwave signal could control the mind.  In the
context of long term, low-level effects: Cesaro felt that central
nervous system effects could be important, and urged their study
"for potential weapons applications."  After testing a low-level
modulated microwave signal on a chimpanzee, and within
approximately a week causing stark performance decrements and
behavioral disorganization.  Cesaro wrote, "the potential of
exerting a degree of control on human behavior by low-level
microwaves seems to exist."  On the basis of the primate study,
extensive discussions took place and plans were made to extend
the studies to humans.

    According to a former DOD security analyst, one such
microwave experiment with human subjects took place at Lorton
Prison in the early 1970s.  He said that such research (in a
weapons context) has occurred on behavioral effects of microwaves
since 1976.  He also asked, "Why are you so concerned about then? 
What about now?  They can call anyone a terrorist.  Who are they
using it on now?"

                               Behavioral Effects

    In June, 1970, a government think tank, Rand Corporation,
published a report by R.J. MacGregor, entitled "A Brief Survey of
Literature Relating to Influence of Low Intensity Microwaves on
Nervous Function."  After noting that the U.S. microwave
guideline in effect in 1970 for the public, 10,000 microwatts/^2
(now the industrial and military "guideline"), is proscribed from
consideration of the rate that thermal effects are dissipated,
the author, a specialist in modeling neural networks, states that
scientific studies have consistently shown that humans exhibit
behavioral disturbances when subjected to non-thermal levels of
microwaves, well below this level.  The symptoms that MacGregor
lists for those humans exposed more or less regularly at work or
in the living environment are insomnia, irritability, loss of
memory, fatigue, headache, tremor, hallucination, autonomic
disorders and disturbed sensory funtioning.  He reports that
swelling and distention of nerve cells have been produced at
intensities as low as 1,000 microwatts/cm^2 (the current U.S.
guideline for the public).

      In a companion Rand paper, June, 1970, entitled "A Direct
Mechanism for the Direct Influence of Microwave Radiation on
Neuroelectric Function," MacGregor sets forth the idea that the
electrical component of microwave radiation induces transmembrane
potentials in nerve cells and thereby disturbs nervous function
and behavior.  

    Microwaves penetrate and are absorbed more deeply so that
they can produce a direct effect on the central nervous system. 
With smaller wave lengths the principal absorption occurs near
the body surface and causes peripheral or "lower" nervous system
effects.

    Dr. Milton Zaret who analysed neurological effects for the
CIA during Project Pandora (he is now one of the few doctors
willing to take the government on by testifying on behalf of
plaintiffs filing claims for microwave health damage), wrote
that, "receptors of the brain are susceptible and react to
extremely low intensities of microwave irradiation if this is
delivered in accordance with appropriate "coding."  Coding is
reported to be influenced by the character of the signal so as to
be a function, for example, of the shape and amplitude of the
pulse or waveform.  

                  Remotely Reinforcing Specific Brain Rhythms

    Dr. Ross Adey, formerly of the Brain Research Center at
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, now at Loma Linda
University Medical School, Loma Linda, California, was among the
first of the Pandora researchers.  His work is more precise in
inducing specific behavior, rather than merely causing
disorganization or decrements in performance -that is, apart from
his studies on inducing calcium efflux in brain tissue, which
causes interference with the fucntioning of the brain and is one
basis of "confusion weaponry."

    More specifically, Adey's thesis is that if the
electroencephalogram (EEG) has informational significance, one
can induce behavioral changes if one imposes environmental fields
that look like EEG.  During Adey's career, he has correlated a
wide variety of behavioral states with EEG, including emotional
states (e.g., stress in hostile questioning), increments of
decision making and conditioning, correct versus incorrect
performance, etc., and he has imposed electromagnetic fields that
look like EEG, which has resulted in altered EEG and behavior.

    In published accounts of Adey's work, he has shown that it is
possible to apply low biologic frequencies by using a radio
frequency carrier modulated at specific brain frequencies.  He
demonstrated that if the biological modulation on the carrier
frequency is close to frequencies in the natural EEG of the
subject, it will reinforce or increase the number of
manifestations of the imposed rhythms, and modulate behavior.

    The conditioning paradigm: animals were trained through
aversion to produce specific brain wave rhythms; animals trained
in a field with the same rhythm amplitude modulated on it,
differed significantly from control animals in both accuracy and
resistance to extinction (at least 50 days versus 10 in the
controls).  When the fields were used on untrained animals,
occurrence of the applied rhythm increased in the animals' EEG.

    Dr. Adey is an accomplished scientist, which leads one to
believe the significance of this experiment goes beyond mere
reinforcement of the animal's brain waves.  Did the rhythms that
he chose to apply have special significance with relation to
information processing or conditioning?  The 4.5 theta rhythm
that he applied was the natural reoccuring frequency that he had
measured in the hippocampus during a phase of avoidance learning. 
The hippocampus, as Adey wrote in an earlier paper, "...involves
neural processes connected with consolidation of memory traces. 
It relates closely to the need for focusing attention, and the
degree to which recapitulation of past experience is imposed." 
One might add, to ensure survival.

    Does it follow that an EEG modulated carrier frequency can be
used to enhance human avoidance learning?  You bet, provided the
same careful procedures are followed with humans as were with
animals, the same result would accrue.  Recall again the goals of
Pandora - to discover whether a carefully constructed
electromagnetic signal could direct the mind.

    The obvious question becomes, how many and with how much
accuracy can behavioral states or "frames of mind" be
intentionally imposed, that is, apart from the certain
technological capability to promote disorganization and
degradation of perception and performance through use of the
fields.

    In fact, many components of learning or conditioning
including affect (i.e., "feeling" or emotional states) can be
imposed through use of the fields from a distance.  E.g.,
behavioral arousal, orienting reflex, subliminal stress (alarm
reaction without realization of the contextual significance),
so-called levels of consciousness, inhibition of cerebral
functions, which would render one more susceptible to suggestion
or influence, and so on.  All components necessary to produce
behavioral conditioning, including ways to provide contextual
significance, can be applied from a distance (i.e., without
direct brain contact, as was necessary in older behavior
modification experiments.)
    
                                  Applications

    The end of Project Pandora may have signified the end of
research into the cause of effects of the varying frequencies
registered at the American embassy in Moscow - some known to be
due to CIA and National Security Agency equipment, but interest
in microwave and biological frequency weapons did not wane. 
Indeed, there are indications of applications.  As we have seen,
research that began in response to a security concern,
transformed almost overnight into a search for weapons
applications, while cloaked in disinformation about the Soviets. 
What types of weapons?

                         There Are Three Possibilities:

    (1) that microwaves, perhaps modulated with low biological
frequencies, are used from a distance to cause performance
decrements and disorganization by interfering with neuro-electric
function; or by causing central nervous system effects,
subjective feelings of ill health, or health syndrome associated
with periodic exposures at intensities below 10,000
microwatts/cm^2;  

    (2) that microwaves are used to create organ specific
effects, e.g., tissues with less blood circulation, like the gall
bladder, lens of the eye, etc., can compensate less to increased
heating; heart disfunctions can be caused; lesions or necrosis of
internal tissues can be induced without a subject necessarily
feeling heat, and symptoms might manifest later, at certain
frequencies, slight heating or "hot spots" can be created at the
center of the head; there is an ongoing Navy contract to find
parameters to disrupt human metabolic functions; or

    (3) that they are used in an interdisciplinary approach to
remote conditioning by creating information processing effects,
as Dr. Adey's work shows, or to induce "feeling" or "emotional"
elements of cognition, such as excitatory reactions, subliminal
stress, behavioral arousal, enhanced suggestibility by inhibition
of higher functions, or various other EEG or behavioral effects.

    There are strong indications that microwaves have been used
to cause the decrements.  There is no question but that the U.S.
military and the CIA know the behavioral or psycho-active
significance of applied biological rhythms and other frequencies,
as this was part of the thrust of their work during Pandora. 
Inducing emotion or feelings through use of electromagnetic
fields, and then sychronizing the feelings with words (symbolic
of ideas) would be an effective way to induce preferences or
attitude change, because it would mirror natural thought
processes.  The question seems less whether conditioning through
use of covert technology is possible, than whether there has been
a policy choice to use it.  If the results of their research are
used as part of a system that can condition behavioral responses
from a distance, it is a secret that they hold close like a baby.

    Richard Helms wrote of such a system in the mid-1960s while
he was CIA Plans Director.  He spoke of "sophisticated approaches
to the 'coding' of information for transmittal to population
targets in the 'battle for the minds of men'..." and of "an
approach integrating biological, social and physical-mathematical
research in attempts... to control behavior."  He found
particularly notable, "use of modern information theory, automata
theory, and feedback concepts... for a technology for controlling
behavior... using information inputs as causative agents."  Due
to Project Pandora, it is now known that applied biological (and
other) frequencies can also be used as direct "information
inputs" (e.g., of feeling or emotion) and to reinforce brain
rhythms associated with conditioning and information processing. 
One way to get such a signal into a human may be through use of a
high frequency carrier frequency.  Results of research into
information processing, unconscious processes, decision making,
memory processes and evoked brain potentials would likely be
expolited or integrated in an interdisciplinary system.

    Covert technological influence is not so foreign to the
American way of life as one may think.  It was reported in a 1984
U.S. House of Representatives hearing that high frequency audio
transmissions are applied, for instance, in some department
stores to prevent theft (one East Coast department store chain
was reported to have saved $600,000 over a nine-month period),
and in some grocery stores with the result that employee induced
cash shortages significantly decreased and employees are better
mannered.  In other words, as Helms wrote of, verbal messages are
delivered at frequencies above human hearing.  Technology for
commercial applications is relatively sophisticated (one studio
uses a "layered" approach and 31 channels in preparing tapes;
some employ a "dual coding" approach, integrating scientific
knowledge of information processing modes of the two brain
hemispheres, and others use techniques where a consumer is spoken
to as a three year old child.)  There is no U.S. law specifically
regulating these types of transmission (over radio and TV a
Federal Communication Commission "catch all" provision might
apply).  If industry uses indetectable audio transmissions to
meet security concerns, it seems that the military and CIA would
exploit the same technology and would have developed much more
sophisticated technology for applications.  The public's
conception of "subliminals" is naive compared to capabilities.


    It seems reasonable to conclude that to the extent that such
an approach exists to manipulate behavior, "defensive"
applications would consist of applying it wherever a potential
threat exists or to counter a threat.  For instance, Central
America is an area where those in officialdom keenly feel the
"threat of Soviet domination."  If there is technology available
that could conceivably influence Central Americans toward the
Soviets, then the U.S. would use the same kind of technology to
"even the score."  The same is true within the U.S.; if covert
technological influence might be had against Americans, the same
feared technology would be applied to counter the threat. 
Special security risks might include peace groups, whom are felt
to be threatened by Soviet influence (a big security concern in
Western Europe and in the U.S.), progressives, or any group or
individual felt to pose a challenge to U.S. goals subsumed under
the rubric of "national security interest."

    Given the nature and dubious goals of lumbering military
inertia, and circuitous CIA "mirror logic", leads one to the
conclusion that "defending" against possible or actual attempts
to manipulate behavior means moving to the offensive, and perhps,
having the "edge" with applications.  Possible or actual threats,
according to tenets of military and intelligence craft, means
"the other side" has the technology if the United States does. 
Also, it would be too difficult to monitor behavior altering
transmissions and to defend against them.  Short of exposing such
technology there would be no way to defend except by having one's
own "system" (of behavioral patterns consisting of a set of
signals signifying "yes" and "no," or "good" feeling and "bad"
feeling that can be linked to ideas).  Recall that apart from
Project Pandora, the CIA spent decades during MKULTRA and related
projects, devising operational techniques to surreptitiously
influence and affect behavior.  Workable invisible weapons are
too useful for arms control talks, and don't readily lend
themselves to proofs of use or "verification" processes. 
Additionally, the importance of finding ways to circumvent
dissent may have been one of the most significant lessons of
Vietnam.

    Over the counter audio aside, the military has studied and
considered for usefulness in a warfare and psychological warfare
context a wide range of biologicals or pharmacological
substances.  In the memo referred to above, Helms wrote that the
U.S. is five years ahead of the Soviets in pharmacological agents
producing behavioral effects.  Some of these substances would
increase susceptibility to influence if incorporated in the 
multidisciplinary approach he wrote of.    For difficult
subscribers, perhaps in foreign parts, there are substances that
have psychological or psychobiological effects ranging from
subtle through devastating, and that cause increased
susceptibility to conditioning.  Some of these substances are
similar to ones which are recognized by neurotoxicologists or
behavioral toxicologists as occupational hazards; some are
variations of substances used experimentally in laboratories to
produce selective damage in certain neuronal tracts.  Many
substances needn't be injected or orally ingested, as they may be
inhaled or applied with "skin transferral agents," i.e. chemicals
like the popular industrial solvent, dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO),
which can, in fact, enhance the applied substance's effect.  For
instance, some compounds cause damage that produces increased
sensitivity to stimulus, distraction (or flooding of thought
associations), and enhance susceptibility to influence.  I.e., a
state where automatic parallel information processing, which
usually takes place outside of awareness, and interferes with
conscious or more intentional limited channel processing.  While
causing acute mental symptoms wouldn't be the goal in groups,
producing mild distraction, an ego weakened blurring between the
sense of "I" and "you", would enhance some kinds of conditioning
and promote suggestibility; then, perhaps transmitted "thought
associations," "the voice of God", "lucky advice" or whatever,
can more easily get through and have an effect.  A side effect of
lowered resistance to sub-threshold stimulus might be that some
would become aware of illicit influence (even under normal
circumstances there is a wide variation in sensitivity among
individuals to sub-threshold stimulus; normal individuals whom
psychology terms "reducers" are much more sensitive in this way;
actually, most schizophrenics are extreme reducers, and
therefore, much more aware of stimulus that others aren't
cognizant of).  Convenient to the agencies involved in covert
influence, is that among primary syptoms of schizophrenia or
mental illness are ideas that one is being influenced by
"transmissions" (e.g. radio frequencies), "voices" or even
telepathy; unless complaints about covert psychological weapons
are well organized, they would tend to be discounted as
indicative of mental imbalance.

    There are many ways to create temporary or permanent staes
that increase receptivity to suggestion and/or conditioning.  It
is interesting to note that scientific studies have correlated
exposure to electromagnetic fields alone with mental hospital
admissions and worsening of symptoms of mental patients, even as
an etiological factor in the onset of mental illness.  (A marker
disease for exposure to microwaves is damage behind the lens of
the eye; a disproportionate number of persons so damaged also
suffer from mental disease or neurological impairment.)

    The CIA is also interested in neuropeptides; these have
profound effects when administered within a conditioning
paradigm.
                                Specific Targets

    Weapons against whom?  Safe to say, in order to enlist the
aid of scientists, the military and CIA would act true to form,
that is, to motivate and overcome reluctance due to dictates of
conscience, they would evoke a serious security risk, like the
Soviets, during initial phases of development.  In fact, on the
"unclassified" face of it, a number of reports have openly
suggested use of "microwaves" against "terrorists".

    Los Alamos National Laboratory, now under supervision of
University of California, prepared a report for Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) setting forth that use of microwave
radiation on terrorists could kill them, stun them or at least
modify their behavior by changing their "perceptions."  At this
point the cloak is donned, and the report continues: "There are
reports of Eurasian communist countries performing research with
combined fields of signals from several different microwave
frequencies to produce at least perceptual distortions in
humans."

    Cable News Network recently aired a report on electromagnetic
weapons and showed an official document that was a contingency
plan to use electromagnetic weapons against terrorists.  It
wasn't made clear who the terrorists were or what the contingency
was.  Prior to the news show, however, reports had surfaced, the
source a DOD medical engineer, that in the content of
conditioning, microwaves and other modalities had regularly been
used against Palestinians.

    It makes sense that the Palestinians would be targeted as a
group for experimental purposes and to meet strategic goals.  For
instance, to exacerbate discord between political factions, a
"bad feeling" (biologically uncomfortable or threatening) would
simply be associated through use of sound with the idea of the
"other" faction.  It is an easy psychological trick to induce
negative attribution (where a "bad feeling" is caused to be
misattributed to something in our environment): feeling, followed
close in time with information input will color a thought, and
become a conditioned emotional response (CER) if repeated.  An
excitatory autonomic reation requires a cognitive appraisal or
"labelling" of the inducing cause.  Both the autonomic reaction
and the labelling can be transmitted from a distance using
electromagnetic fields, like radio frequencies or microwaves and
"sound."

    Specific frequencies at low intensities can predictably
influence sensory processes.  Feeling: pleasantness -
unpleasantness, strain - relaxation, and excitement - quiescence,
can be created with the fields.  Negative feelings and avoidance
are strong biological phenomena and relate to survival.  Feelings
are the true basis of much "decision-making" and often occur as
sub-threshold impressions.  Anger and other negative feelings are
easy to cause to be displaced, and most people believe in the
"trueness" of their feelings.  Ideas including names can be
synchronized with the the feelings that the fields can induce.

                                Greenham Common

    Rather than belabor the obvious, for when DOD develops a
weapon it can be said with certainty that it will be tested and,
if possible, where it would be useful to meet their goals;
another example will put motives and, at least, one type of
application in more realistic perspective.

    Women peace activists have kept an ongoing vigil at the
periphery of the U.S. Air Force base at Greenham in England since
1981.  They are protesting build-up of nuclear weapons.  The U.S.
Cruise missiles, which are nuclear warheads small enough to be
mounted on the back of a truck called a launcher vehicle, arrived
at the base in March, 1984.  Since then the women in the
encampment and members of the Cuisewatch network have insured
that when the launcher vehicle and its convoy are taken out into
the British countryside, the "dispersal exercises" aren't as
secret as the military intended them to be.  The women of the
network, non-violent activists, have been subjected to intense
harassment in an effort to be rid of their presence.

    In the Fall of 1984, things changed dramatically; many, if
not most of the women began suffering illness; and,
simultaneously, the massive police and military presence at the
base virtually disappeared, and new and different antenna were
installed at the base.  In a report prepared by Rosalie Bertell,
commissioner for International Commission of Health Professionals
for Human Rights, a non-governmental organization based in
Geneva, Switzerland, the unusual patterns of illness ranged from
"severe headaches, drowsiness, menstrual bleeding at abnormal
times or post-menopausal, to bouts of temporary paralysis, faulty
speech coordination and in one case apparent circulatory failure
requiring hospitalization."

    Other symptoms documented by peace activist Kim Bealy, who
coordinates investigations into reports of illness at specific
places around the base, included; vertigo, retinal bleeding,
burnt face (even at night), nausea, sleep disturbances and
palpitations.  Psychbological symptoms included lack of
concentration, disorientation, loss of memory, irritability and a
sense of panic in non-panic situations.  The symptoms have
virtually all been associated in medical literature with exposure
to microwaves and most listed can be induced through low
intensity or non-thermal exposures.

    Measurements were taken around the base by members of
Electronics for Peace and by others.  Strong signals, up to one
hundred times the normal background level were detected on a
number of occasions.  In fact, signals ten times stronger than
those felt to be emanating from normal base transmitting systems
were found.

    The strongest signals generally appeared in the areas where
the women said that they suffered ill effects.  For instance,
they were found to cover the women's encampment near the "green
gate" (gates to the base are designated by color), but stopped
abruptly at the edge of the road leading to the gate.  The
strength of the signals were also found to reflect the activity
of the women: e.g., they increased rapidly when the women started
a demonstration.  Visitors to the encampment, both men and women,
reported experiencing the same types of symptoms and the same
pattern of variation as the Greenham women.  It may be revealing
that British personnel who guard the perimeter of the base work
very short shifts (two hours at a time) and only for two weeks.

    What else has been used against the women of Greenham
Commons?  If high frequency verbal transmissions are used in U.S.
department stores and have a significant effect in meeting their
security goals, it seems likely that the military would also
exploit the same technology.  What would such a message tell the
women?  "There is something wrong with this place, 'I' want to
get out of here, 'I' don't like it here..."  Perhaps auditory
transmissions would be simultaneous with the transmissions that
were making them feel unwell.

    In a review prepared by National Bureau of Standards, Law
Enforcement Standards Laboratory, for Nuclear Defense Agency,
Intelligence and Security Directorate, use of low intensity
microwaves was considered for application as a "psychological
deterrent."  The report stated, "...microwave radiation has
frequently been cited as being responsible for non-thermal
effects in integrated central nervous system activity.  The
behavioral consequences most frequently reported have been
disability, listlessness and increased irritability."  The report
fails to mention just as frequently cited low intesity microwave
health effects as chromosome damage; congenital birth defects;
autonomic nervous system disregulation, including disruption of
bio-cycles; impaired immune function; brain damage and other
neurological abnormalities, including leaks in the blood brain
barrier and depletion of some neurotransmitters; among a host of
other health impairments not to be taken lightly.

    A reckless form of biological and psychological control has
been perpetuated whether the source of the symptoms of the
Greenham Commons is radar surveillance aimed at the women, or if
there is conscious application of the microwaves as a "deterrent"
or a means to drive the women away.  Calculated efforts were also
directed at preventing or eroding community support.  In the
summer of 1985, women planning to visit the camp had to be
notified that long term health effects might ensue for women who
were pregnant or intended to be.  As activist Kim Bealy put it,
"It would now appear that we are protecting the missiles by
killing people slowly."  

    Health complaints similar to those of the women at Greenham
Common are being made by women peace activists at Seneca, New
York, and from activists at other locations.  The symptoms at
Greenham seem to occur on an occasional basis now, perhaps due to
the Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces (INF) treaty, which applies
to the missiles housed there, or due to somewhat increased public
or congressional awareness.

    It is not necessary that the transmission take place from
equipment in the vicinity of a target (although the Greenham
women seemed to be suffering from transmissions made from within
the base.)  Propagation of microwaves has been very well studied
and is very sophisticated, e.g., a two inch beam can be sent from
a satellite, point to point, to a receiving dish on earth; and,
it was reported in 1978, that the CIA had a program called
Operation Pique, which included bouncing radio signals or
microwaves off of the ionosphere to affect the mental functions
of people in selected areas, including Eastern European nuclear
installations.

    In the U.S. the military has intentionally obfuscated
discussion of environmental health effects.  With their ally
"industry" they have won, at least for the time being, the right
to perpetuate their interests, to the detriment of the public's
best interests.  Scientists who have spoken up on the
environmental impact of military microwave or electromagnetic
systems have been treated as security risks, and have had their
funds cut, so great is the military's concern in protecting their
communications systems by ensuring themselves unlimited use of
radio frequencies or microwaves.

    The upshot is that in the U.S. at this time, there is no
legally enforceable microwave standard.  There never has been an
enforceable standard for the public or the workplace.  Microwaves
at intensities within the suggested "guideline" have finally been
shown, even by U.S. research, to cause health damage.

    Worse, some industrial exposures are extraordinarily high. 
For instance, plastic sealers, a low income group comprised
mainly of women within childbearing years, use equipment that
exposes them to over 10,000 microwatts of microwaves or radio
frequencies throughout an eight hour day, and in some case, to
hundreds of milliwatts.  As energy absorbed from their equipment
flows to ground, so much heat has been felt in the ankles of some
workers that they have learned to do their tasks with their feet
elevated on plastic.  They are not provided metal shielding as
workers are in more health conscious countries.

    While most of the public are only exposed to very low levels
of microwaves and radio frequencies, a considerable number
(between one and two percent) live or work near emitters, such as
radio and television transmitters, military and airport radar,
and industrial tools utilizing these frequencies.  Therefore, it
is likely that they are exposed to levels that have been proven
to be unhealthful or downright dangerous.

                 References for Remote Mind Control Technology

1.  McAuliffe, Kathleen, The Mind Fields, OMNI magazine, Omni
Publications, February, 1985

2.  ISN News, Reproductive Hazards From Video Display Terminals,
Planetary Association for Clear Energy, 1985.

3.  Adey, W. Ross, Neurophysiologic Effects of Radiofrequency and
Microwave Radiation, Bulletin of the New York Academy of
Medicine, V.55, #11, December, 1979; The Influences of Impressed
Electrical Fields at EEG Frequencies on Brain and Behavior, in
Behavior and Brain Electrical Activity, Burch, N. and Altshuler,
H.I., eds., Plenum Press, 1975; Effects of Modulated Very High
Frequency Fields on Specific Brain Rhythms in Cats, Brain
Research, V.58., 1973; Spectral Analysis of Low Frequency
Components in the Electrical Activity of the Hippocampus During
Learning, Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology,
V.23, 1967.

4.  Koslov, Sam, Bridging the Gap, in Nonlinear Electrodynamics
in Biological Systems, Adey, W.R. and Lawrence, A.F., eds.,
Plenum Press, 1983.

5.  Steneck, Nicholas, The Microwave Debate, MIT Press, 1984.

6.  Brodeur, Paul, The Zapping of America, W.W. Norton and Co,
1977.

7.  Marha, Karel, Microwave Radiation Standards in Eastern
Europe, IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques,
V.MTT-19, #2, February, 1971.

8.  Zarat, Milton, Human Injury Relatable to Nonionizing
Radiation, IREE-ERDA Symposium - "The Biological Effects of
Electromagnetic Radiation," 1978.

9.  Annals of New York Academy of Sciences, V. 247, February,
1975.

10.  Frey, Allan, Behavioral Biophysics, Psychological Bulletin,
V.65, #5, 1965; Human Auditory System Response in Modulated
Electromagnetic Energy, Journal of Applied Physiology, V.17, #4,
1962; Neural Function and Behavior: Defining to Relationship,
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, V.247, February,
1975; Exposure to RF Electromagnetic Energy Decreases Aggressive
Behavior, Biolectromagnetics, V.12, 1986.

11.  MacGregor, R.J., A Brief Survey of Literature Relating to
Influence of Low Intensity Microwaves on Nervous Function, Rand
Report, R-4397, 1970; A Direct Mechanism for the Influence of
Microwave Radiation on Neuroelectric Potentials, Rand
Corporation, P-4398, 1970.

12.  Becker, Robert O., The Body Electric, William Morrow and
Company, Inc. 1985.

13.  Bowart, Walter, Operation Mind Control, Dell Publishing,
1978.

14.  Subliminal Communication Technology, House of
Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology,
Subcommittee on Transportation, Aviation and Materials, 1984.

15.  Rosenfeld, Sam and Anne, The Roots of Individuality: Brain
Waves and Perception, Mental Health Studies and Reports Branch,
National Institute of Mental Health, October, 1975.

16.  Harvey, J., Ickes, W., Kidd, R., New Directions in
Attribution Research, V.2, John Wiley and Sons, 1978.

17.  Regna, Joseph, Microwaves Versus Hope, Science for the
People, V.19., #5, September/October 1987.

18.  Bealy, Kim, Electromagnetic Pollution: A Little Known Health
Hazard, A New Means of Control?, Preliminary Report, Greenham
Comman Women's Peace Camp, Inlands House, Southbourne, Emsworth,
Hants, P0108JH.

19.  Kramer, J. and Maguire, P., Psychological Deterrents in
Nuclear Theft, National Bureau of Standards for Intelligence and
Security Directorate, Defense Nuclear Agency, NBSIR 76-1007,
March, 1976.

20.  Lapinsky, G. and Goodman, C., Psychological Deterrents to
Nuclear Theft: An Updated Literature Review and Bibliography,
Center for Consumer Technology, National Bureau of Standards for
Surety and Operations Directorate, Defense Nuclear Agency, NBSIR
80-2038, June, 1980.

21.  World Health Organization, Environmental Health Criteria 16,
Radiofrequency and Microwaves, Geneva, Switzerland, 1981.



