~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
                         Public Announcement
                      of the E-mail address for
                the Jewish post-zionist formation, the 

           JEWISH   PEOPLE'S   LIBERATION   ORGANIZATION  (JPLO)
                          d256344@er.uqam.ca

                          affiliated with the 
      International Human Rights Organization for American Minorities
                             NGO  UNESCO

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

        As the continuation of the previous committees, "Canadian Jewish 
Supporting the Palestinians" and the "Alliance of non-Zionist Jews" in 
Toronto, the JPLO has worked together with Palestinian committees in 
Montreal, Ottawa, and Toronto.  
        The organizer of the JPLO, Abraham (eibie) Weizfeld, has 
published two books on the subject;
                Sabra & Shatila: A new Auschwitz
                Jerusalem International Publishing House
                Ottawa, 1984
                {Endorsed by the Arab League director, Ottawa, and
                sponsored by the Palestine Information Office}

                The End of Zionism and the liberation of the Jewish People
                Clarity International Press
                Atlanta, 1989
                {African-American press of the International Human 
                Rights Association for American Minorities}

and the pamphlet,

                Reciprocity and Nationalism
                Unikorn Publishing, 1992
                Montreal,  La galerie Fokus

The associated journal is

                ICI maintenant / Here and Now
                Montreal

        We wish to indicate our willingness to work together for the 
national self-determination of the Palestinian People, to move towards 
peaceful relations between the Israeli Jewish population within the 
context of Palestinian independence, and in the struggle against fascism 
and anti-semitism (both anti-arab and anti-jewish).


                        Notice of legal proceedings
                        ___________________________


        The JPLO organizer, Abraham Weizfeld, who had been arrested at 
Concordia university for distributing his anthology of Jewish dissident 
writings "The End of Zionism and the liberation of the Jewish People" is 
to appear in the Montreal municipal court on May 10 for a preliminary 
hearing on a criminal code 
charge of "obstruction of police".  It is considered that this charge is 
in contravention of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms provision 
for freedom of expression, not to mention academic freedom.
        Considering that the free distribution was conducted the week 
after the Hebron massacre the matter is placed in a political context 
which determines whether the zionist political parties can maintain their 
dictatorship over the Jewish people in the face of such criticism of the 
zionist ideology.
        News reports on the incident are contained in the Montreal 
Mirror, the Concordia student paper The Link, The McGill Daily student 
press, the political journals Socialisme maintenant and The Militant, and 
the student TV programme Concordia Today.

        In addition the JPLO appeals for aid and advice in its 
application to the United Nations Palestine committee/division in its 
application for updating of the NGO status.  Furthermore, the JPLO has 
made a submission with the Human Rights coordinating committee of UNESCO 
in opposition to the public activities of neo-Nazi organizations in 
Montreal and Toronto and wishes to coordinate Human Rights work in this 
respect as well.

            Thanking you for your attention to this message,

                we wish to maintain contact through 
            correspondence lists and discussion groups

                                the
            Jewish  People's  Liberation  Organization
                                JPLO

                c/o  La galerie Fokus / Cafe Kaballah
                        68 est, avenue Duluth
                          Montreal  H2W-1G8
                                Kebek

                        vox #: (514) 284.66.42
                        Fax # P.O.: (514) 845.94.95
                        BBS Fokus: (514) 285.23.43  
                                   [2400,8,1, ANSI-BBS]

                        E-mail:  d256344@er.uqam.ca

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


