"We delude ourselves if we believe that we participate in a democratic 
polity, except in the Orwellian sense of educated discourse" -Chomsky

 The Anarchives 			Volume 2 Issue 9
	The Anarchives			Published By
		The Anarchives		The Anarchy Organization
			The Anarchives	tao@lglobal.com

		Send your e-mail address to get on the list
		Spread The Word Pass This On...

               --/\--			AT&T
             /  /  \  \			Centre Of Empire
         ---|--/----\--|---		In the Information Age
             \/      \/			
             /\______/\			by Jesse Hirsh

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

On Thursday (Sept 21/95) of this week there was a significant if not 
paramount historical event.

Amerikkkan Telephone & Telegraph, in a time of mergers and consolidation, 
announced a three-way split.

This should be viewed as a substantial power move of a global nature.

AT&T is the leading corporate power. They embody corporate governance, 
and the rise of fascism.

Metaphorically speaking this breakup was the equivalent of the brain 
detaching itself from a cumbersome body.

The core of the break-up resides in the corporation that will retain the 
AT&T name. This corporation will compose of AT&T's phone networks, 
cellular networks, and capital corporation; in addition of course to Bell 
Labs, perhaps the most advanced research & development organization in 
the world.

Please note that the networks that will remain AT&T, compromise the 
backbone of what emerges as the electronic conscious. The phone networks 
are a in part a monopoly of long distance networks, combined with 
extensive fiber networks with global reach. The cellular networks, 
formerly McCaw Communications, are what will soon become the 
infrastructure of multi-way television, and the 9 Billion dollar, Bill 
Gates - AT&T, Teledesic Corp which is attempting to launch 900 
"low-altitude" satelites to carry a larger cellular network.
AT&T capital of course owns all the rest. The two companies that will 
break off from the old mammoth of AT&T will still be owned by AT&T 
Capital, much like the rest of the capital world.
Bell Labs of course is responsible for most of the technology that exists 
today. They make kazillions just on licensing fees, and are perhaps the 
leading force in the development of so-called "future" technologies.

I like to keep my eye on AT&T for the simple reason that they have their 
eyes on us. ;)

Just to slip in a little history on AT&T; they have traditionaly been an 
integral part of what has been commonly termed the "military-industrial" 
complex. They have developed a large majority of amerikkkan military 
technologies, and have become grossly rich as a result. They still 
command a virtual monopoly on military and large corporate 
telecommunication business. These muuhfukkas are straight up evil.

Look to them to be an emerging fascist power, silently becoming the 
backbone of the world consciousness that mcluhanites are all harping 
about.

With this breakup AT&T becomes much more flexible in being able to 
dominate the global market, and in essence become the very fabric that 
this new market is being built upon.

On Thursday when all this happened almost 12 Billion dollars was injected 
into AT&T after they announced this move. Clearly capital approved this 
strategic move, and AT&T has been given their mandate for global domination.

And yet the large majority refuse to recognize or even begin to consider 
the possibility of corporate governance.

The power AT&T have now, at the dawn of the information age, is 
staggering, and I would argue, uncomprehensible.

This power will grow exponentially, accellerating an already accelerated 
rate of change after the announcement of this break-up.

Liberal democracy depends upon the incospicuousness of AT&T, and the 
ignorance of corporate governance.

If the true role of AT&T were to be laid out on the table, the farce of 
democracy would dissolve, as clearly AT&T is not a democratic 
institution, and yet it dominates the world...


