Paranoia's Ok when they're really doing it to you. * by Flick Ruby

Waking up to sirens and hiding paper, heart sinks fingers rise, the
helicopter again, with satelites they can see into your room even with the
windows boarded up.  Alone in the house, I am never safe from men, even the
ones I love, they know where I live, will I ever see the faces of the
listeners?  There's a narc somewhere here, what will they report and to
whom?, 786 ASIO assesments last year prompted mainly by the Gulf Crisis,
12,000 fine or two years for naming an agent, more police in Victoria than
the number sent to Vietnam, 10,000 uniformed trained in bias and obedience
police, there's some now, fuck the car's unroadworthy, they came at 5.30am
with axes, whe was pinned down wearing only a T-shirt, Blue Phoenix the
program where they give you drugs to make you forget, Orwell knew, they've
got more photos of me than my mother.....

When do facts start to become paranoia?  When does caution become
obsession?  When does the word "paranioa" become an accusation that dilutes
your opinions to easily digestible human frailities?  Who does that serve
and is it paranoia to notice?  Suspicion eats away at you heart and mind at
times, yet as a tool of political survival, it is not to be dismissed.
The state spends more and more time and money thinking about expressions of
political dissent and how to dilute and moniter the "movement".  It follows
that some of these resources would be spent infultrating the groups that
are active.  Basically I think you're incredibly stupid if you don't take
this as an obvious fact, so I'm going to work on this premise.

