Anarchy: a journal of desire armed. #38, Fall 1993.
INTERNATIONAL ANARCHIST NEWS
-includes Support Mazokopos!, The Anarchist Scene, International
Squatting interview, San Diego National Love & Rage Conference.

@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
Letter from Greece

Support Mazokopos!

"Our aim is to climax our struggle at the second trial, whenever
this is appointed. We invite you to support this struggle by all
means."

Comrades,

 This letter concerns the case of the anarchist fighter K. Mazo-
kopos, who, as you might already know, was sentenced to 17 years
imprisonment by the first court decision. We would like to remind
you briefly that K. Mazokopos was arrested at the hospital to which
he had resorted after an explosive mechanism had accidentally gone
off in his hands, thereby causing him the loss of his left eye and
his left hand up to the wrist. The next day (8 Nov. '90), the
police discovered guns, ammunition and printed matter in the
warehouse where the above incident had taken place. K. Mazokopos
was immediately charged with theft and possession of explosives,
explosion by negligence, as well as participation in the execution
of the psychiatrist of the Athenian penitentiary (Korydallos
Prison), on sole evidence of a pamphlet found in the warehouse, for
which the armed organisation Revolutionary Solidarity had claimed
responsibility. As was known to us and was proved later in court,
the pamphlet had in fact been mailed to the Union of Anarchists of
Athens, where Comrade Mazokopos was correspondence attendant.

 Two significant developments followed upon the excuse of this
tragic incident:

(a) A "criminal hunt" was released among the anarchists and the
extreme left, resulting in the arrest and imprisonment of the
fighters Koyannis, Bouketsidis and Bergner, allegedly members of
the "Mazokopos group," who were finally reprieved after a long
hunger-strike.

(b) The enactment of the anti-terrorist Act was accelerated. The
purpose of this act is to annihilate visibly, morally, politically
and socially either those who have made the choice of armed
struggle, or those whom the police or the Secret Services
occasionally consider necessary to present as such, that is, every
time their force of social control and repression is challenged or
questioned. The latter is the least apparent but most frequently
used feature of the Anti-terrorist Act: its very endorsement was
based on constructed evidence and the inflation of facts concerning
our comrade.

 It is indeed notable that since the reestablishment of parlia-
mentarism (1974-5_), respective laws and unjustified arrests were
not the outcome of tactical victories of the State against armed
organizations. Quite contrarily, they were enforced either because
the State would feel threatened by social unrest, or for the
psychopath's monomania which one of the gangs that control it would
use to distinguish itself from the rest and perform "counter-
terrorist services."

 This also explains the disproportion between constructed evidence
and factual truth: In twenty years of armed struggle in Greece only
two guerrillas have become known, the revolutionaries Ch.
Tsoutsouvis and Ch. Kasimis. They were both assassinated by the
police (1985 and 1978 respectively) in confrontations that were
brought about by chance rather than preparation and plan.

 As for comrade Mazokopos, the security forces charged him with as
many accusations as could be squeezed out of the warehouse in a
highly arbitrary way. In the trial, our comrade admitted having
rented the warehouse in 1983 with a forged I.D. for the storage of
an archive of anarchist printed matter. On leaving the warehouse in
1988-89, two other persons took over, the names of which he never
got close to disclosing. The unlucky incident occurred during the
last withdrawal of his own archival material.

 For his outright stance and his refusal to become a traitor, the
court convicted him for a devastating 17-year prison sentence. He
was nevertheless discharged of the accusation of the psychiatrist's
murder and the three were completely acquitted, as Mazokopos had
also asked for in court.

 We, as friends and comrades of K. Mazokopos, do not accept any of
the accusations against him and continue our support (a significant
part of which is financial, political and moral). Our aim is to
climax our struggle at the second trial, whenever this is
appointed. We invite you to support this struggle by all means.

 We believe that this case should become known in a wider radius
than we could handle, for K. Mazokopos is one of the purest and
most honest Greek fighters for Anarchy. There is also need for his
financial support, given the conditions of his health and his
proletarian background. Moreover, we should coordinate our actions
in such a way that the issue of solidarity to K. Mazokopos acquires
international status. We will inform you about the date of his
second trial at the Appeal Court (around which our struggle will
reach a peak), as soon as we know. Greek consulates and embassies
are some of the sites where internationalist Anarchist Solidarity
can be demonstrated.

 If you wish, you can contribute financially to the following
account number: National Bank of Greece 251/940054-08
                                              With comradely regards,
                                                 Anarchist Initiative
                                                      of Thessaloniki
                                                            POB 11251
                                                   54110 Thessaloniki
                                                               Greece

@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
                         _The_anarchist_scene_
                       Compiled by Jason McQuinn

 RADIO FREE DETROIT is a new pirate radio "Voice of Rebellion"
broadcasting from Detroit's Cass Corridor at 106.3 FM from 8PM to
11PM "on whatever day we feel like it."
 LEFT BANK DISTRIBUTION's "Summer 1993 Update" lists about a
hundred new arrivals to the incredible selection of anarchist and
related books and periodicals. Updates, as well as the main
catalog, are free, although donations of $1.00 or stamps are always
appreciated when asking for the catalog. Write to Left Bank
Distribution at 4142 Brooklyn Ave. NE, Seattle, WA. 98105).
 THE VANCOUVER ANARCHIST BLACK CROSS "dissolved as a collective,
anti-authoritarian project a few years ago. As of January 1993 it
officially no longer exists at all. [Former members] will try to
answer the correspondence that's been received to present. [They]
ask people who still want prison solidarity/abolition contacts to
pursue other projects that are active. Check the anarchist
press...."
 BLACKOUT BOOKS (POB 20181, Tompkins Square Station, New York, NY.
10009) is a new all-volunteer anarchist book collective operating
out of the alternative community space ABC No Rio in New York. The
collective hopes to open a storefront in later this year. Check it
out.
 THE POWER AND THE PROPHET (on the Waco massacre) is the latest BAD
Broadside (#9) from the Boston Anarchist Drinking Brigade (BAD
Brigade, POB 1323, Cambridge, MA. 02238).
 THE HARRISON AND TURNER BOOK CO. (404 S. Washington St., Olympia,
WA. 98502; phone 206-754-2151) has allotted three shelves for a
collection of anarchist books for sale on consignment by local
anarchists.
 "PERMANENT TAZs" is the title of a new broadside from Hakim Bey
by way of Dreamtime Village (Route 2, Box 242W, Viola, WI. 54664).
I'd suggest sending a SASE or a contribution for a copy.
 TEATIME ANARCHY get-togethers are now at 7 PM on the 1st & 3rd
Tuesday of the month at 317 Union Ave. #1, Olympia, WA. 98501;
phone 206-534-9588.
 A FEW BACK ISSUES OF ANARCHY: A Journal of Desire Armed (C.A.L.,
POB 1446, Columbia, MO. 65205-1446) are still available in bulk for
free distribution at the cost of postage & packaging. We now have
extras of several issues including #19, #20-21, #25 & #31, along
with a very few extras of other issues. For those living in the
U.S. we suggest you send about 15=9B to 25=9B each (depending on the
size of the issue[s] requested and your distance from Missouri) for
50 to 150 copies. (Unless you live in the Midwest=FEwhere postage
will be cheaper, send a minimum of $7.50, and make any checks out
to "C.A.L." only. Those outside the continental U.S. need to send
much more to cover the higher costs of postage.) All copies will be
marked "FREE" on the covers. To order bulk copies for resale, see
the terms listed in the box on page 2.
 If you have announcements concerning anarchist gatherings, new
publications, or other anarchist activities or projects which our
readers might find of use, you can send them to: Attn. Anarchist
Scene, c/o C.A.L., POB 1446, Columbia, MO. 65205-1446. Please
remember, for more information, or for ordering materials listed in
this column, you must write to the addresses given above and not to
C.A.L.

@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
International Squatting: An Interview with Pixie and Miranda
Compiled by Anders Corr

Anders: What have your experiences with squatting been?

Miranda: I broke a squat twice. Once I got away with it and once I
got caught. I have had other people break a squat and then just
lived in it with them. I have lived in about three squats. In
Berlin, Pixie lived in a squat and I did for awhile as well. We
have been squatting all around the world, but not on a long-term
basis.

A: What are the different places that you squatted?

Pixie: Chronologically, I came over to Europe from South Africa,
and went directly to Berlin where I started to live in a squat, and
then Miranda went to London and her and some other South Africans
broke a squat in North London, which was quite amazing because it
was six or seven women, all very powerful women, and we were all
from South Africa where you can't squat. It is impossible because
there is no extra housing because the population is so high. People
don't even know about squatting. They were squatting in London, and
I and another girl were in Berlin living with punks in a squat. I
came over, and there was space in that squat. We stayed there and
then broke another squat. The squats were quite short-lived. You do
have rights. It was a council house, which was quite a sound thing
to do if you are living in a council house which is unoccupied.

LAWS AGAINST SQUATTING

M: Except now there is a law going through which is going to make
squatting illegal because at the moment it is a civil offense and
not a criminal offense to squat in England. Along with taking out
the sites and cities for travellers and their vehicles and making
parking your vehicle on public land illegal, they are trying to
bring through a law which makes squatting illegal.

P: If you are travelling or have no fixed abode, they are just
clamping down. Before you had rights as a squatter. You had rights
to be on land. We lived in a vehicle for awhile. Now they are
passing through these laws which make it impossible.

M: They will introduce these slowly. The law will go through and it
will be illegal. They obviously can't put all 70,000 squatters in
London alone into jail.

P: There is a huge amount of people squatting.

M: They will leave people there, but slowly but surely tighten the
law, so it will not be a radical thing, but squatters are going to
be squeezed out. It is historical as well, going right back to the
vagrancy laws in England.

P: It is completely iniquitous because there are so many homeless
people and there are places that are derelict that people have left
because the mortgages are too high to pay for their land, so they
abandon their house. You can go around to certain areas and all the
houses are boarded up, so if you are squatting, you can be chucked
out anytime. You always have a couple of squats in mind that you
can break in a night. They can get you for stealing electricity or
water before they can get you on occupying the house. The best
squat is if you get a house with hot water and electricity, then
you are fine. In one house we had electricity upstairs and only
cold water. You can make do though. It was in winter. It is really
exciting.

M: The electricity man comes around and you can't deny him entry
because he has to be able to look at the meter. Although the police
cannot evict you, the electricity man can come in, then he can say
to the police "They are stealing electricity." and then the police
have an entry right and can kick you out.

P: So they have a way around it. They have a squatters manual which
squatters and anarchists have put together. There are organizations
that you can go to that help you legally, so that if you get
evicted or get shit from the land-person, then you know what to say
in court and how to put eviction off.

BREAKING THE SQUAT

P: We got evicted from this house and there was another squat down
the road. When you break a squat you should go one or two, change
locks, occupy it and then you are fine.=20

[You stay in the house. =FEM]=20

There were quite a few of us, ten, we made a bit of noise and the
woman upstairs freaked out. "No way are you squatting here, I have
had enough..." She wouldn't talk to us. We said "We don't want to
bother you, we're gonna live here quietly." She went and called the
police, but meanwhile she put her washing machine drainage outlet
through the floor, and we were squatting underneath, and it just
flooded, a huge, huge waterfall. It must have been three or four
upstairs. She must have been completely crazy.=20

[And messing up the house, you can't live there. =FEM]=20

And then the police came. We had changed the locks and said "We
know what our rights are, you can't come in, etc., etc." and the
cops just started to kick the doors down with their boots, these
boots kicking, kicking. There is nothing you can do. Supposedly you
can take it in to court, but you can't. They are doing something
that is uncivil, unjust. The same night we got chucked out of one,
then chucked out of another, then we went back to the first squat
and suddenly we were surrounded by cops again. Flashlights ev-
erywhere, there must have been six or seven cops. Then the land
person was there and they let us stay a bit longer in that one.

M: We made an agreement with the person who was in charge of the
house. Basically what is happening is squatters are being evicted
and then someone else moves in and re-squats. That is what happened
with that house. It was a really easy house to squat because
someone had squatted it and been evicted when we moved in. When we
spoke to the owner, it was like, "You guys can stay here, but will
you leave when we ask you to?" We said, okay, we will leave when
you ask us to, and that will be about three months time. He said,
"Yeah, in three months time." We struck up an agreement with him,
which he broke.

P: You can't trust them, and you can't extend it in the court by
saying "We don't have our legal evidence together, we want another
week or two." Basically that was a done-house, so we left.

BRIXTON AND ACRELANE

P: We knew people in Brixton, which is South London. Certain areas
of London are squatting scenes. The info-shop is in Brixton, it is
anarchist, there are animal rights people, and a lot of squats
because it is relatively low-echelon economically. There are a lot
of derelict houses, but a lot of very together people. There is
also a squatting organization and people helping you out, living
for skiffs [dumpsters]. We met these people who were squatting a
clothes shop, and a whole lot of people had been living there for
awhile. We were welcome to stay there. That place got evicted, but
it took three or four months so they had their home all that time.

M: Every squat has a different story. There was a big development
in Acrelane, with thirty-seven people living there. The police
raided the place, they were completely out of their legal rights.
They kicked everyone out, you had to pick up your stuff and go. If
you weren't there and didn't have a friend there, they chucked your
stuff out on the street.

P: It was obviously housing a lot of illegal people from
Czechoslovakia and South Africa. We weren't illegal, but that is
the cover, the police come and want your identity.

SOLIDARITY

P: There is a very good feeling in London, the Brotherhood and
Sisterhood of squatters. If you get chucked out and need a place to
stay and there is a squat, it is an open house, a home, and people
respect it as their home. With squatters there is a really tribal
feeling about them.=20

[squatting was amazing from that perspective. =FEM]=20

If you met a squatter you knew you had something in common. You are
fucking the system and you are going to look after each other.

M: It was a really positive thing because you are bringing life
into a house that is being left dead and taking people off the
streets. We did a lot of planting vegetables, and cleaning and
painting the house, cleaning up the garden, a lot of really good
things in one squat.=20

[Except that we trashed it afterward. =FEP]=20

Then we were evicted so we trashed it.

P: We didn't do it personally, but it got trashed because there
were black fancy fireplaces and light fixings. There were about
fourteen of us living in one squat. It was a semi-detached house
that we knocked through, so it was a really big house. All over
Brixton there are these big houses with communities living in them.
It is really an amazing feeling that you get from the whole thing.
There is a big difference of feeling from squatting there and in
Amsterdam or Berlin. In Berlin the biggest squats are more
established, and they are very politically active, as much as
London, but London was smaller. The one I stayed at in Berlin was
thirty-six people. They were hardcore punk anarchists, they weren't
politically active, except for beating-up fascists. I suppose that
is active. We had just arrived and didn't speak the language, when
we met them on the street they said, "Come, stay in our squat." We
lived there for a couple of months. We had never squatted before,
having just come from South Africa, but they were really good to
us.

POLICE REPRESSION

P: It was crazy, us coming from white South Africa and how we were
treated by the law. In South Africa you could do anything really
and you were still kind of protected. When you squat in London,
suddenly you were given the same prejudice that we have seen the
white South African police force give the black people. Treating
them like scum. We have black cops chasing us into our squat and
arresting us for nothing and treating us like complete shit. The
cops know where your squat is. They know who is doing what and who
is not abiding by the laws.=20

[Especially in Brixton, because it is very political. =FEM]=20

Yes, and the cops are really quite hardcore. One time we went for
a drink at the pub, but we weren't drunk or anything, and the guy
who was driving wasn't drunk. The cops were circling around the pub
and once he went around the corner we jumped into our car and drove
off to our squat. When we got there a cop was waiting for us, and
then they called back-up and suddenly there were eight or nine
police and riot cars. We just drove home from the pub. Then their
sirens carried on, basically riling us and everyone came out of the
squat and wanted to know what the fuck was going on, why we were
being treated like this and then they were making us angrier and
angrier so they would push us, then they arrested us. They took us
somewhere and dropped us off and we had to walk home at four
o'clock in the morning through one of the most dangerous areas of
London. They were playing with us.

M: Recently just before we left the squatting scene, because of
this law, there has been a blitz going on with the coppers. When
our last squat was evicted at the same time there were five or six
of our friends in different squats all being evicted at the same
time. It was really hardcore.=20

[It was a surge. =FEP]=20

Evictions are going on more and more, they are not being done
legally either. The cops are tired of playing the squatters' rights
game because it goes through the courts and everything. So they are
being more and more illegal about it, forcing there way, making it
look like the squatters are being disruptive and then evicting
them.

ANARCHISTIC ATTITUDES

P: One has to consider that most of the squatters are anarchistic,
fucking the system.=20

[What percentage are anarchistic? =FEA]=20

All of them.=20

[All of them. =FEM]=20

Maybe not terminology-wise, but definitely in London none of them
are towing the line in terms of the system. They may not call
themselves anarchists. A lot of them are into petty-crime, nothing
that we would have thought of as crime. We used to live a lot out
of skiffs, you call it dumpster diving. We had a skiff behind one
of the shops. It is illegal, they can get you for shoplifting if
you take food that has been thrown away. People are caught for
that. We lived out of the skiffs, because you got no money. Then
they tell you you are living off the system because they are giving
you the dole, and you should stop fucking them over. Meanwhile they
are making you apathetic and giving you the dole and then making
you angry and then silencing you. It is a continual political
struggle. I definitely found in London the squats are much more
friendly than in Holland or Germany. In London they take you in
immediately. I have heard quite a few people say that the
solidarity of squatters in London is quite amazing.

WITCH'S SQUAT

A: You were talking about the house you moved into with seven
women. How did you meet together and decide to squat?

M: There were five women and ourselves. They were South African
girls and I didn't know them in South Africa.=20

[We went to the University together. =FEP]=20

I didn't know them, but because we were all in the university
together, I knew someone who knew someone and we met because we
were South African ex-pats in London and got together to see each
other. We got along really well. I chose to hang out with them
because I could identify with them. There was a lot to learn from
those girls. It was an excellent squat. It was really nice to see
women getting it together and doing it and breaking into the house
and changing the locks, holding the fort. When the squat was broken
and all the locks had been changed, because it was an enormous
three story house, we were all exhausted and really scared. It was
a dark and dingy house. We all went into one bedroom and laid down
and went to sleep. We hadn't been asleep for more than half an hour
when we heard this banging on the roof and scampering around. We
thought, "Oh, God, who is here?" What has happened in the past is
heavies have come in, bashed down the door, beat you up and ejected
you. Who knows who they are working for and why they are doing it.
That is a danger. We didn't know what was happening and we sat
upright and there was a guy on the other side of the door who
happened to be squatting the house completely alone, a lone ranger.
We spoke through the door, negotiated, and agreed to let him into
his own home which we had taken possession of. We ended up living
with him, which was really cool because he was a Londoner and he
knew the ropes.=20

[He was a real squatting-man. =FEP]=20

He had been squatting for years and years. He has five squats going
at a time because he is on the run from the cops. He has different
homes to go to, so he was delighted to have one of his homes
brought to life. It was a really good community. He taught us a lot
and we taught him a lot and we were really busy with womanly
workshops and spirituality in the house. It was nice.=20

[What kind of stuff? =FEA]=20

We explored the Gnostics at the time, we were going to a workshop
in a place in London and we were trying as a group to apply what we
heard.=20

[All philosophical readings, Tarot, I-Ching, Crystal reading. =FEP]=20

Exploring lots and lots of things.=20

[Things that we didn't have access to in South Africa. There was
more reading matter and people working in London. South Africa is
a bit behind. =FEP]=20

We didn't interact with men at all.=20

[We used to draw on the walls and play together. We were right next
to a park and we played tennis, showered and danced and went to
Stonehenge together, yoga. It was actually brilliant. =FEP]=20

Wasn't it wonderful? All women.=20

[Yea, it was completely wonderful. =FEP]=20

It was really nice because there was no one to tell us how to do it
except Stan-the-man.=20

[He didn't really have much to do with it. I think when men came
there they were quite intimidated. It really felt like a clan of
witches. The energy in the house was very witch-like. This is our
space. It was nice. =FEP]=20

Bloody nice.

SEXISM

A: What is the sexism within the anarchist squatting movement? What
are your experiences with that?

M: It differs from place to place.

P: Mostly we were involved with people who were completely correct.
In London there was very little sexism within the squatting scene.
You were a woman and you were a man. It was just a gender thing.

M: I never felt sexually harassed by any squatter. Never, ever.=20

[No. =FEP]=20

I think we may have harassed some boys once or twice.=20

[Feminism was just a basic given, an understanding. =FEP]=20

Since I have come here I have been amazed at the sex workshops and
how they have been received with such awe. "We need this and we
haven't spoken enough about this." In England it was easy, though
they were just the people we were involved with, there is obviously
still a lot of sexism in England itself.

WHO THE FUCK CAN OWN THIS TREE?

A: How do you feel about the abstract concept of ownership of land
and property in land?

P: I think the craziest thing capitalism ever has done is to allow
people to buy and sell land. I think it is completely sinful and
evil. Who the fuck can own this tree?=20

[Who put a price on anything? It is completely elitist that land
belongs to some people and not to others. =FEM]=20

There is so little you can do about it because you just get hurt
every time.=20

[Everyone can walk across a piece of land and just by walking
across it you surely own it. =FEM]

ARREST AND SOLIDARITY

M: If someone goes to prison or gets nicked for something by the
cops all the people are with him completely. They go to the jail
and wait. The Earth First!ers call it an "affinity group." If a
person is in trouble, you're completely there for them. If they get
nicked for shoplifting or anything, immediately someone gets the
word out and it brings the energy and they work with the people.
Two weeks before we left, which was about a month ago, they were
having a party and there were a lot of French and Hungarian people
there illegally. The coppers came and tried to break in. We said
"You can't break in, we're having a party. We'll turn the music
down if that is what you want." They called back-up and stormed the
house and hectically beat up the squatters. They arrested about
eighteen of them and kept eleven in custody. They beat up the
squatters and then accused them of assault. They had to stay in
prison and then give them two thousand pounds to get parole and
they had to check in every single night at the prison to sign on.
They weren't allowed out of the Brixton area. They were fucking
with these people with laws.

P: One British person and eleven people from Czechoslovakia and
France were kept in the system. The British person was set free,
but he has to sign in at the Brixton police station every day,
which means you can't leave London at all, Because you can't go
anywhere in one day. You aren't allowed out anyway. All the others
had a thousand pound bail in order to come out. The court case was
set for six months time. They were going to be held in remand for
six months if they didn't get a thousand pound bail. We knew only
a few of them personally. We squatted only with the one guy, who
was a really good friend of ours, but he is chased by the police
everywhere he goes. The other people we didn't know so well, but
everyone in the whole area was pooling. There were benefits every
weekend. The people we were squatting with wrote up pamphlets and
passed them around at demos. The amount of money raised was
unbelievable. At every festival they sold beer or cider and profits
were donated. Suddenly all their energy went to saving their
people, all ten of them.=20

[Ten thousand pounds was raised by people who have nothing. =FEM]=20

If they had wanted to go travelling, they wouldn't have made the
money because they wouldn't have had the passion to do it. They
didn't do it for themselves, but they suddenly put out all this
energy and got the people out of prison, which was absolutely
phenomenal. They have one set of clothes, don't have cars or
houses, but they have money to get people out of jail. I am feeling
very positive now.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
San Diego National Love and Rage Conference
By Mark E.

 The 1993 Love and Rage Network met in San Diego at the Che Cafe
from July 7-11. The Che Cafe is a dynamic vegan collective, meeting
area and place where bands play. During the conference volunteers,
fully enjoying themselves, cooked yummy vegan meals (and lots of
green beans) three times a day. Many people slept in the cafe's
tree/plant sanctuary or on the nearby beach.

 The Love and Rage Network has primarily consisted of a national
newspaper produced in New York and Mexico City and of loosely-
affiliated groups around North America, and has coordinated some
national actions.

 Amidst discussions friendly but divisive controversy surrounded
the interest of some in a membership category within Love and Rage.
Membership would include: 1) receiving Love and Rage publications
2) a negotiable $25 fee to pay for this communication 3) some
representation in Love and Rage decisions (through council
delegates). Approximately one half of the group supported this
proposal to build a national organization for future coordinated
national actions. The other half in attendance wanted to maintain
the loose network and thus thought a membership category would be
too much "politicking" for them. Ultimately the anti-organization
people (about 15) left to allow the pro-membership group to succeed
in their proposal. Many anti-membership folks said they would
continue to work with Love and Rage but not be members.

 Opinions varied with this non-consensus membership decision. Some
saw it as the first step in building a stronger, more organized
anarchist movement and felt fully justified in
ignoring the consensus process in favor of continuing the work of
building an organization into which they had already placed much
time and energy. Several viewed it as the latest in a series of
Love and Rage dissenters being frustrated and pushed out of the
network and newspaper production group. Many production group
people have left because of "backroom politics" and because a small
group was always forcing its agenda, according to several confer-
ence participants. Others accused Love and Rage of "party-building"
and "top-down organizing" because the "exclusionary elitists got
their agenda as usual." Further the Neither East Nor West group
stated they would not petition for the reinstatement of "On Gogol
Boulevard" in the Love and Rage newspaper because of other outlets
for "OGB" and because of Love and Rage's instability and "leninist
strain."=20

 Love and Rage is attempting to counteract these accusations of
vanguardism by acknowledging this centralism and by shifting many
network function to the Bay Area (POB 3606, Oakland, CA 94609).

 With the pro-network people leaving, the dozen or so left at the
meeting decided not to choose permanent council delegates and to
change the name of the network to the Love and Rage Revolutionary
Anarchist Federation. Earlier the group decided to concentrate on
working against anti-immigration sentiment and continuing anti-
racist actions. Mexico City anarchists will continue producing Amor
y Rabia. Political prisoner campaigns, poster printing, the May 9,
1994 action against immigration controls and phone trees are the
latest work of the post-conference federation.


