The following is an excerpt from Newsletter 7 from Blitz (Oslo, Norway)
February 1994

*Blitz Infogruppe, Pilestredet 30c, 0164 Oslo, Norway, tele: +47.22 11 01
09, fax: +47.22 11 23

*Blitz is a busy autonomist free space/social center in Oslo with a
vegetarian cafe, newspaper, radio station, library/bookstore/record store,
and meeting/hang out/band space. Blitz and Norwegian antifascists have been
under attack by fascists and police since December 1993.

*the following excerpt from Newsletter 7 transcribed and circulated without
any changes whatsoever by robert ovetz, sound@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu. The
four page newsletter also contains other info about anti-fascist resistance
in Norway. Antifascists uncovered collaborations between the fascist
Fedrelandpartiet (FLP) or The Fatherlands Party and "NSDAP/AO" from the US
after an FLP election rally was disrupted.

Newsletter 7 from Blitz

Anti Fascist Struggle Continues
As society moves to the right, the nazi groups grow bigger and stronger.
During the last year they have clearly been expanding. They have managed to
gather in fewer groups, and stop some of the splitting. The boneheads have
regular meetings in Oslo, they have established themselves in a local radio
station in Oslo (Radio Nite Rocket), they have tried to hold several public
meetings, etc. Also the attack on Blitz x-mas '93 shows how much more
selfconfident they have become. Another change which has been noticed by
anti-fascists is that it has become more and more common that nazis openly
walk alone and in smaller groups in the streets of Oslo. They haven't dared
to do that often earlier, in fear of reactions by anti-fascists. But the
fascists have also been met by massive resistance by anti-fascists, both by
mass-mobilization in demonstrations and by smaller, militant actions. In
spite of the strong resistance by anti-fascists, it is quite clear that the
fascists are growing stronger. It also seems that they are establishing
more international contacts, and that they are starting to get more
accepted by fascists in other countries.

Here is a short summary of the most important events:

Local nazi-radio attacked
In December '93 the local fascist-radio Radio Niote Rocket was exposed in
Dagbladet (Nowegian version of "The Sun"). Antifascists had for a long time
had their eye on this radio. So, on December 26'th 70-80 antifascists went
down to the offices of Nite Rocket. A blockade was planned outside the
radio because the well-known bonehead leader Ole Krogstad, from Boot Boys,
was going to be a guest in the studio and talk about the nazi-skinheadband
Skrewdriver. Instead the antifascists spontaneously broke into the radio
offices and smashed the place. Because it was second christmas day, the
police didn't have enough cars out to attack and arrest any of the
antifascisst on their way back home. It took Nite Rocket  3 hours to get
back on the air.

Blitz attacked by nazis
December 29'th at 2.30 am, 25 boneheads attacked Blitz with
molotov-cocktails and fired four rounds from a shotgun through the windows.
Nobody was hurt. The house was massively defended by people on guard inside
Blitz. The fascists left in cars after a short whyile, and were stopped and
searched by the police, but nobody got arrested. The incident was not
mentioned in the bigger newspapers. But it was clear that it was a revenge
action after the attack on their radiostation. Radio Nite Rocket (which is
on the air 8 hours every night) were sending threats on the air, to Blitz
in the hours before the attack. And the bonehead leader, Ole Krogstad, was
guest in the studio. The fascists also used the radio offices to gather
before they attacked Blitz.

Mass-mobilization against Nite Rocket
As an answer to the fascistattack December 29'th, antifascists started
mobilizing to a big demonstration against fascism, racism and Radio  Nite
Rocket. 18,000 flyers were spread all over the city; to the youth gangs, to
the immigrant communities, to all the schools and so on. The nazis were
also mobilizing with some posters and flyers to a counter-demnstration. The
newspapers were in beforehand speculating in riots and violence between
antifascists and fascists. Over 2000 antifascists showed up, and that's
only with 14 days mobilization. The police appereance was massive.
        Three Swedish nazis were arrested on the border on their way to
Oslo with molotov-cocktails. 17 nazis were arrested inside Oslo, all with
baseball bats and other weapons. Cars filled with nazis were stopped by the
police at at least 3 places outside Oslo. With the heavy police appearance
there was no possibility for the antifascist protesters to reach the radio,
or the 25-30 fascists who actually dared to show up for the
counter-demonstration. So everything went on peacefully. The demo was a
major victory for antifascist mobilization.
        Later, the same night, a group of militant anti-nazis smashed a
snack-bar, Terningen, which is well known as a commercial sponsor for Radio
Nite Rocket. In fact Terningen was the only sponosr left that wished to
have their commercials on a nazi-radio. The snack bar is also known because
of their apartheid prices (the food is more expensive for black people).
        Close to Blitz, on their way to an antifa concert, some of the
people the police suspected took part in the smashing of Terningen, were
attacked and tried arrested. Heavy fighting erupted between the antifascist
and the police. More people from the concert came to help. The poice were
chased away, and two policecars were left in the middle of the road without
any cops inside. More police arrived, with the result of 7 policecars being
smashed, before all the antifascists withdrew back into Blitz.
        The anti-Nite Rocket demo was covered by most of the newspapers as
a demo with a few hundred people from Blitz, although one can see on the
pictures that thousands took part. The riot was offered a small note in all
the newspapers.

Blitz raided by police
6 o'clock, in the morning ofFebruary 16'th, 150 riotpolice invaded Blitz.
There were only a few people inside, and they decided not to defend the
house because of the heavy number of pigs. The police occupied Blitz for 6
hours. They searched through out datafiles, confiscated our
molotov-cocktails, baseball bats, gas masks and the barricades on the
pavement outside of Blitz were taken away. Some of our datafiles were also
erased by the police.
        The same day 25 people went to the house of the Police Inspector,
and tried to tear down her fence as an answer to the police taking away the
barricades from Blitz. Both this action and the molotov-cocktails, the
police found inside, caused mass condemnation from media and politicians.
Even the earlier ally, and MP of the Workers Communist Party (AKP), said
Blitz is "playing with terrrorist methods."
        But still we received support from the youth organization of AKP,
the Red Youth. The police and media tried to give the impression that Blitz
was raided because of the police equipment that was stolen from the smashed
policecars during the riot outside Blitz a few days earlier. A closer
examination is that the police feared the negotiations between Blitz and
the City Council which were going on. The barricades on the pavement
outside Blitz, was something the police wanted to get away by any means
necessary. The raid is also a way for the police to criminalize Blitz and
the antifascist struggle in Oslo.

Negotiations with the City Council
At the same time the City Council, lead by the Social-Democrats, used the
situation to push through 4 ultimatums, as part of the negotiations to
legalize Blitz. Blitz has all along been sceptical to this, but agreed to
have a meeting with the Council to check it out. The 4 ultimatums launched
by the Council was: No weapons inside Blitz, no barricades outside on the
pavement, Blitz must have a hire contract and the electricity system must
be repaired. Blitz has not accepted these 4 ultimatums. Later the same
weeks the leader of the City Council stated to the media that he
overreacted....
        Representatives from Blitz have been in one or more meeting with
representatives of the city council after this incident, and the demands
are clear. We won't accept any of the ultimatums, but we can make a
contract on our premises. If they do not accept, we won't negotiate any
hiring contract at all.

Boneheads try again
Many of the nazis live not far outside Oslo, and during the last year they
have tried to gather every first Saturday of the month in Oslo. The purpose
is to build contacts, drink, walk around in town and beat up dark skinned
people and anti-fascists. This means that the central city isn't safe those
days, and that the fascists are establishing some control over the streets.
        On the first Saturday in February they gathered again. During the
evening the nazis had spread around the city, and they attacked and
hospitalized at least 4 people. Fortunately, antifascists were prepared.
The pub where the nazis were sitting was attacked by 20 anti-fasacists and
4 nazis were hospitalized. One fascist was sent with serious injuries to
the central hospital.



