-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Spiderbot docs typed up by Twilight Zone.........Call (818) 446-0891  1200-9600
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
NOTICE:  If you like surprises, DON'T READ THIS MANUAL!  This game has a lot of
hidden surpises and twists which are described in the manual.  For exploring
and discovering on your own, you won't need help from the manual.

If you decide to venture through the game alone, stop reading after the
INTRODUCTION - and good luck!
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------


INTRODUCTION
------------

Deep within the Citadel, three runaway chemical reactors are rapidly
approaching meltdown.  These time bombs threaten to devastate the surrounding
electronic jungle.  The only remaining SpiderDroid has been sent into the
territory of the Citadel to find and diffuse the reactors.

OBJECTIVE
---------

SpiderDroid is a one-legged robot that can move left or right, or jump straight
up.  He can fire a net, which he uses to capture the strange creatures which
live near the entrance to the citadel.

SpiderDroid snares creatures in his net and stores them in his portable cage.
Later, on his journey, he can use the creatures to perform tasks for him in
exchange for their freedom.  For example, one creature, called the Stinger,
will allow SpiderDroid to jump incredibly high.  And the Big Borer can be used
to burrow through solid walls.

SpiderDroid starts out exploring the jungle and the world outside the Citadel,
in search of the creatures.  Capturing creatures is only one part of his
perilous journey, however.  The Citadel is protected by robot guards that fire
energy-draining plasma bullets.  Unfortunately, the SpiderDroid has no defense
against these patrol guards.  His only chance is to turn into SPIDERBOT, a two
legged, ceiling crawling robot that can fire radioactive bolts in self defense.

Scattered throughout the jungle area are the parts needed to allow SpiderDroid
to transform himself:  two legs and a red power globe used to energize
Spiderbot.  Only when he has collected these parts can he infiltrate the
citadel.

Once he has gathered the necessary leg parts, he must find the FIST to discover
the secret of becoming SpiderBot.  Enlist the help of the Rock Hopper creature
to open the huge stone sculptured FIST.

There are, however, some barriers to success.  Lasers are impassable when
activated.  Electromagnets are impassable without a little "lifting help" from
a Ray.  And there's no way to get around the stone walls unless a Big Borer is
used to gnaw through them.

HINTS:  Throughout the game, be mindful of your power level, indecated by a
verical bar at the bottom of the screen.  Various creatures, such as Malevolent
Men of War, Stingers, and Big Borers will sap your energy if you come in
contact with them (unless you are using them from your cage to perform a task).
The robot guards will drain quite a bit of energy with every shot they fire at
you.  Falling from great heights as SpiderDroid will also drain some of your
power.  When your energy gets very low the resulting energy crisis will allow
some of the creatures to escape from your cage.  If your energy reserve level
drops to zero, the game is over.

Loading Instructions
--------------------

o  Set up your Apple II computer as shown in the owner's manual.
o  Plug your joystick in as shown in the owner's manual.
o  Insert SPIDERBOT into the disk drive, label side up.
o  Turn on the computer.

Make Your Selections
--------------------

When the game is loaded, you'll see the title screen of the game, then the
first screen.  A bouncing pink Rock Hopper allows you to make your choice
between the Full or Short versions of the game.  The Full game allows 30
minutes for you to capture the creatures you need, find the parts to SpiderBot,
and deactivate the reaactors.

A Short version of the game is provided that gives you 20 minutes to neutralize
the reactors.  In the Short version, you alread have one of each creature, and
the parts needed to allow you to transform into SpiderBot.  Move the Rock
Hopper left and right to select either Full or Short, and press the FIRE BUTTON
to make your choice and begin the game.

CONTROLS:
--------

Move the joystick left or right to move SpiderDroid left or right.  To jump,
push the joystick back, then forward.  The FIRE BUTTON is used to fire the net.
The net coninues to float across the screen until you release the FIRE BUTTON
to drop it.  For a higher trajectory, push the joystick forward as you press
the FIRE BUTTON.  You can hold up to eight of each type of creature in your
cage.  Note:  when you release a creature, do not fire a net while it is
helping you, because this will kill it.

Move the joystick back to get a display of the remaining time in the game.  If
you press the FIRE BUTTON while the joystick is back, you get a menu of
pictures at the bottom of the screen.  This menu lets you release any of the
creatures (displayed left to right), or transform back and forth from Spider-
Droid to SpiderBot.  Move the joystick left and right to move the pointer to
the desired action, then press the FIRE BUTTON.  The large E allows you to end
the game.

When you transform into SpiderBot, a parcel of energy is borrowed from Spider-
Droid's power supply.  This energy level is shown to the right of SpiderDroid's
energy reserve level indicator.  Keep an eye on the "Spark Indicator" at the
lower right corner of the screen for a visual display of SpiderBot's energy
level.  You must change back to SpiderDroid before this energy runs out in
order to pay back the energy used or it will be lost forever.

While you are SpiderBot, you can push the joystick forward to "fall" upward.
Be aware, though, that SpiderBot consumes twice as much energy when
upside-down.

Keyboard Commands:
-----------------

        I
    J       K
        M

Press either the Open Apple or Closed Apple key in place of the joystick fire
button.  Press Ctrl S to toggle the sound off and on.

Note:  When using keyboard controls, be sure the Caps Lock key is engaged.

CAST OF CHARACTERS:
------------------

Big Borer:  The Big Borer is a bad tempered beast that likes to lurk where it
   can reach out and bite the unsuspecting passerby.  If you move close to it
   (but not close enough to get bit, which drains energy), you can draw it out
   and then capture it.  When released (and if SpiderDroid is pointed in the
   right direction) it will gnaw through the solid walls.

Fist:  A large fist-shaped stone, which holds the secret to SpiderBot's
   success.

Malevolent Man of War:  This electric jellyfish is dangerous because it drains
   a lot of energy by stinging you.  It cannot be captured unless first stunned
   by one of SpiderBot's energy bolts.  When released, it can fuse delicate
   electronics within the reactors.

Ray:  A harmless creature that glides back and forth.  In exchange for its
   freedom it will draw a blind eye over the Citadel's radar and help SpiderBot
   enter unnoticed.

Rock Hopper:  A nervous little bouncing creature, necessary for opening the
   Fist.


Stinger:  An irritating and aggressive insect.  Its flying powers can be
   harnessed to help SpiderDroid move upward.

End of Game
-----------

The game ends when you run out of time, out of energy, or successfully disable
the reactors.  A percentage is then shown on the first screen of the game,
showing how many of the rooms you explored.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Spiderbot docs typed up by Twilight Zone
                          Call The Twilight Zone
                              (818) 446-0891
                              1200/2400/9600
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[ //e Transfers ]
[ Time Left: 05 ]: 