Documentation for-


            STELLAR-7


Stellar-7
---------

Game Play: 
Your mission is to reach the Arcturan
star system and destroy the Supreme
Overlord of the Arcturan Empire, the
infamous Gir Draxon.  You will have to
face Arcturan forces on seven unique
star systems.  On each of the star
systems, if you are able to survive the
enemy assault, a Warplink will appear.
Colliding with this Warplink will
transport you to the next star system.


The RAVEN is equipped with:

   -Biphasal Thunder Cannon which fires
    a volley of two nuclear shells

   -Gravitic Scope to locate enemies

   -Inviso Cloak to confuse enemies

   -Protonic Shields which provide
    protection from enemy fire


The RAVEN is destroyed when either the
shields or energy reserves are totally
depleted.



              The Skreen
              --- ------


---------------------------------------
!                                     !
!  -----     -      -   ------   ---- !
! {SCORE}     ( ++ )   {SYSTEM} ! .. !!
! {00800}      ----    { SOL  } ! .  !!
!  -----       <  >     ------   ---- !
!----------------------------  --  -- !
!                           !  !!  !! !
!                           !  !!  !! !
!                           !  !!  !! !
!  3-D out the window view  !  !!  !! !
!                           !  !!  !! !
!                           !  !!  !! !
!                           !  !!  !! !
!                           !  !!  !! !
!                           !  !!  !! !
!                           !  !!  !! !
!----------------------------  --  -- !
!                                     !
---------------------------------------

The score table is clearly marked at
the top of the screen. The funny
looking thing to the right of the
score is supposed to be a bird but I
am not a real good artist. In the game
the bird is filled in if your inviso
cloak is off and is empty if it is on.
Directly to the right of the inviso
indicator is a small box telling what
planet you are on.  To the right of
that is the radar (or gravitic scope).
just below the gravitic scope are two
tube-looking things.  The one on the
left indicates how much protonic shield
protection you have left and the one
on the right indicates your energy
level.  If either one of these runs out
the RAVEN is exploded (and you along
with it).


             Kontrol
             -------

Joystick
--------
Joystick control is very simple.. just
shove the stick in the direction you
wanna go.. button 0 is fire, button
1 is inviso cloak.

Keyboard
--------
The keys are as follows....


         U     I     O

         J     K     L

         M     ,     .

I suppose you can figure out which
key heads you which direction....


Keys Applying to Keyboard and J-stick
---- -------- -- -------- --- -------
{RETURN}           activate INVIS
   Z               Zoom Toggle
   F               Fine Scope Toggle
 {ESC}             Freeze/unfreeze
 Ctrl-K            Keyboard mode
 Ctrl-J            Joystick mode
 Ctrl-A            Selekt Atari J-stik
 Ctrl-S            Sound toggle



For other info look at M)ission
Briefing from the beginning menu.

