<(*--------------------------------------------------------------------------*)>
                                    Docs for
                              --=*>  Tapper <*=--
                                    By Bally
<(*--------------------------------------------------------------------------*)>
                             Call the Everyware AE
                                1(201) 233-0341
<(*--------------------------------------------------------------------------*)>
                       Written by Col. Hogan & Col. Klink
<(*--------------------------------------------------------------------------*)>


         Tapper is a cool game with very good graphics. Unfortunatly the main
theme behind the game is a little worn out, but it is one of the best games to
come out in a while.

Introduction
------------
Object of the game: Serve your customers before they beat you to a pulp.
You can keep them happy if yoou serve them before they come to your end of the
serving table/bar.

Controls
--------
Joystick, move it in the direction you want to go (duh!) and press button to
serve beer.

Keyboard, A, Z up and down, L, ; side to side. You must type in caps. Space bar
to serve the beer.

Hint: the joystick control in this game really sucks, so use the keyboard unless
you like being frustrated. In the joystick mode, your guy won't move at times.

Play of the Game
----------------
As you start out you are in a saloon from the old West. As the customers form a
line go to the tap on the right side of the screen & depress the space bar, a
beer will go down to a customer. If you serve all of the customers you go on to
the next screen. Some customers are more thursty than others and will stay &
send the glass back to you. You must catch the glass or your turn will end. If
the customer is a slop, and spills some of his beer, run over an wipe it up.
Can-Can girls will come & slow the progress of the line, allowing you to catch
up.

After you finish the first screen, you will get 2 customers in each line then
you will goto a cute little intermission, which is a variation of the pea under
the shell game. The second screen you serve some sort of athletes at a game etc.
I don't know what the people are in the 3rd screen. Are they sailors??      r

Hints
-----
If you walk to the end of the bar to pick up the mess, and you are in a hurry to
get back to your end, to pick up more glasses or whatever, just press A or Z and
you will save the time of walking back.

Don't let your customers get to the end of the bar, or they will slide you into
the wall.

If you start filling a glass of brew & you discover that there are no customers
at that bar (you idiot), just walk up, or down, and the mug will disappear.

You can go from the upper most bar to the lowermost bar, by moving up, or from
the lower one to the upper one, by moving down. Saves alot of time.

If a customer drinks his cup at the bar, send him another right away, this will
get rid of him sooner so you can go onto the next level

If you are going to be flooded with cups from two different bars, run forward
and collect as many as you can, at one bar, then run to the other and do the
same, repeat untill you have 'em all.

<*:*-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------*:*>


