

                        Treasure Island Softdocs

                               Typed by:

                           PAP Apple Pirate


                        ***********************
                        * Call PAP's Cove  AE *
                        *  at:  817-732-8813. *
                        *   Password:  COVE   *
                        * Hours: 9pm-7am M-ST *
                        *        24 hours SUN *
                        ***********************

        Greetings, mate, and welcome to Treasure Island! I'm Robert Louis
Stevenson, author of this hearty tale of high-seas adventure.
        In this game, you're young Jim Hawkins, the hero of Treasure Island,
and you'll try to recover the legendary treasure of the infamous pirate,
Captain Flint. To get the booty, you'll need to locate the treasure map. But
beware ... the pirates who sailed with old Captain Flint are also searching for
treasure. These treacherous sea dogs crave riches and rum, and will stop at 
nothing to get them!
        Luckily, you'll have some help on your adventure. The courageous
Captain Smollett, the burly Squire Trelawney, and the wise Dovtor Livesey are
all honest men who'll aid you as much as they can. You'll also meet crafty Long
John Silver and a strange maroon, Ben Gunn. And I'll appear from time to time
as your adventure proceeds.
        Your adventure starts at the Admiral Benbow, the quiet inn and tavern
kept by your family on the misty shores of Bristol, England. You're standing in
the parlor near Billy Bones, a hard-drinking and crusty old pirate
        Are you ready, mate, to embark on an adventure that others have only
dreamed of? Mustr all your courage and choose your friends carefully. If you
can outwit the greedy pirates, you'll find a treasure chest overflowing with
brilliant gold booty-more that you can imagine. Good Luck!

SAVING GAME COMMANDS:

        1. CREATE - typing this at a command prompt will help you init a blank
                    disk to save games on.

        2. SAVE - will save your current place in the adventure to disk. You
                  will be prompted to enter a brief title for that paticular
                  save. (Titles up to 10 characters long)

        3. RESTORE - allows you to load a previously saved game.


OTHER UTILITY COMMANDS

        1. RESTART - start game from beginning.

        2. QUIT - figure that one out yourself.

        3. NEWDATA - gives a list of any changes in this manual (if there are
                     any).

        4. PICTURESOFF / PICTURESON - turn graphics on and off during the game.

        
TREASURE ISLAND VOCABULARY

        Directions

e, east
n, north
s, south
w, west
ne, northeast
nw, northwest
se, southeast
sw, southwest
aboard
above
aft
aloft
ashore
below
d, dn, down
forward, fore
port
starboard
u, up

        Verbs

ask     blow    break   bring   bury    chase   climb   close   cut     drink
eat     enter   escape  examine exit    feed    fight   fill    follow  get
grab    give    go      hide    hit     hurry   jump    kick    knock   leave
listen  look    move    oil     open    patch   pet     pick    pull    punch
push    raise   reach   read    rearrange       remove  repair  rest    run
search  sing    sit     sleep   stand   swim    take    talk    taste   tell
throw   toucd,,,xy~b,,,,yb`cog,,ybxei,,,yi,,,,,{mhi,,,,{mex,,,,{md,,,,,,,,Bcyb[gk/cf|{/f|/n`acx,ibh`i",,,,,,,,Cxdi~uibc!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!#!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!,,Ni,y~i,xc,om``,\M\+,Oczi",4=;!;?>!44=?!,\#[6,OCVE. 9p-7a M-ST. 24 hrs SUN.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

