

                                                                  
                VEHICULAR LONG BARREL WEAPONS MOUNT                    

                                By 

                         David W. Pisenti                                
                          Special Agent
                      Firearms Training Unit 
                           FBI Academy
                                               
                                                                  
     Concealment, Security, Accessibility--These three factors
are critical to the storage of long-barrel weapons in unmarked
law enforcement vehicles.  However, until recently, addressing
all three of these factors simultaneously was not feasible.  For
the most part, law enforcement personnel had no other choice
than to store such weapons in the trunks of unmarked vehicles,
thereby sacrificing accessibility for concealment and security.
Unfortunately, this practice led to many tragic situations that
resulted in injury or death for a number of local, State, and
Federal law enforcement officers.  On June 26, 1975, FBI Special
Agents Jack Coler and Ron Williams were surrounded by
adversaries at Pine Ridge, South Dakota.  Special Agent Coler
was shot while attempting to remove shoulder weapons from the
trunk of the Bureau vehicle.  As Special Agent Williams
administered first aid to his wounded colleague, he too was
shot.  Both Agents were killed at point-blank range.

     Obviously, for maximum personal protection, law enforcement
personnel should have immediate access to shoulder weapons when
necessary.  In response to this need, the FBI developed and
tested an innovative vehicular long-barrel weapons mount that
provides for the concealment, security, and accessibility of
shoulder weapons.  This article discusses the versatility of
this new weapons mounting system, which accommodates a variety
of shoulder weapons and is adjustable to fit a number of
vehicles.

RESEARCH BACKGROUND                                               

     The Firearms Training Unit (FTU) at the FBI Academy began 
conducting extensive research to devise a passenger compartment
storage system for long-barrel weapons in the late 1970s.
Initially, a system was developed to mount the weapon forward of
the front seat cushion.  This system, while providing for
storage and accessibility, did not conceal the weapon
effectively and could not be used in vehicles with bucket seats
or a center console.  Also, because this system could not be
locked, the vehicle could not be left unattended.  Thus, while
the system filled immediate needs, it did not satisfy long-term
objectives.

     In the early 1980s, the concept of a mounting system on the
vehicles ceiling was proposed.  Such a system would improve
concealability and would facilitate storage and accessibility of
the weapon, regardless of interior design variations.

     Along these lines, a manufacturer developed a two-piece
shotgun mount that attached to the outside edges of the vehicle
headliner.  The mount consisted of two components--the butt
assembly, which encompassed the entire circumference of the
shotgun recoil pad, and the barrel assembly, which accommodated
the barrel end of the weapon.  A synthetic spring-loaded dowel
inserted into the muzzle applied sufficient pressure to the butt
assembly to hold the weapon in place.

     To remove the shotgun from this mount, horizontal pressure
needed to be applied to the weapons muzzle.  This freed the butt
from the mount so that it could pivot forward until it was clear
of the unit.  Then, by releasing the tension of the
spring-loaded dowel, the shotgun was ready for use.

     However, for most individuals, both hands were needed to
remove the shotgun from this mount.  This required that the
vehicle be stationary, which resulted in reduced response time
during a crisis.  Furthermore, this particular mount
accommodated only one barrel length of shotgun, and the unit
could not be locked.

REDESIGNED WEAPONS MOUNT

     Then, in 1986, the Firearms Training Unit initiated a
research and development project to design a new ceiling-mounted
vehicular weapons mount system.  In addition to concealment,
security, and accessibility, the FTU set other requirements for
a weapons mount:  1) The ability to fit any vehicle, and 2) the
ability to accommodate a variety of weapons.

     With these specific requirements in mind, FTU Agents
drafted detailed specifications for a weapons mount, which were
sent to interested manufacturers in the industry.  A final
prototype was fashioned and submitted to the FTU for testing.

TESTING THE NEW WEAPONS MOUNT

     To evaluate the effectiveness of the new weapons mount, FTU
Agents conducted a series of tests.  These tests involved
installing the mount in various types of vehicles to ensure its
adaptability to vehicles used by law enforcement personnel.
Then, these vehicles were driven at speeds of up to 65 m.p.h. to
see if the occupants, regardless of seating position, could
dislodge the weapon easily from the mount while the vehicle was
in motion.  Also, shotguns with different barrel lengths were
placed in the mount to test its versatility.  After extensive
evaluation, this prototype was accepted for use in Bureau
vehicles.

INSTALLING THE MOUNT

     The major problem with equipment that is not installed in
the factory is adapting the unit to individual automobile
designs.  Specifically, automobile ceiling construction varies
from manufacturer to manufacturer and even among models built by
one manufacturer.  For example, some manufacturers install
secondary roof supports from front to back, while others use
supports that run side to side.  Also, the distance between
supports depends on the model.  Knowing where secondary supports
are located is important for proper installation of the weapons
mount.

     However, regardless of manufacturer or model design, a
common feature in vehicle roof structures is the steel beam
support that runs the length of the roof above the side windows.
Therefore, specially designed brackets were attached to the ends
of the vehicle weapons mount to accommodate curve variations in
the roof.  These roof-line variations make it necessary at times
to reshape the end brackets so that the unit can be fitted as
close to the headliner as possible.  With the brackets properly
shaped, the mount can be expanded telescopically to fit
virtually any automobile, small truck, or van by adjusting the
screws on the back of the center mount insert.  Also, each
bracket is affixed to the body of the mount by four screws to
facilitate removal for reshaping. Once the vehicular weapons
mount is properly adjusted, it can be installed in the vehicle.

     The weapons mount can also be positioned front to back,
from directly behind the rear view mirror and covering the dome
light with its lens removed.  However, to install the unit in
this fashion, the secondary support must also run from front to
back.  Actually, the vehicular weapons mount can be positioned
wherever there is support to anchor the end brackets.  For
example, mounts could be installed horizontally or vertically on
the side wall of a tactical van.  Once a mount is installed, the
butt assembly can be adjusted to store a particular weapon.

     Depending on the width of the vehicle, this weapons mount
accepts a 14-inch, 18-inch, or 20-inch pump or auto-loading
shotgun of any manufacturer, an H & K or Colt submachinegun, or
an AR-15, M16A1, M16A2, M16A1 or A2 carbine.  In addition, this
unit accepts any shoulder weapon that will fit in both the butt
and barrel-housing assemblies.

ADJUSTING THE MOUNT

     The vehicular weapons mount can be adjusted by loosening
the butt assembly with a wrench and placing the weapon into the
unit barrel first.  Then, the butt assembly should be slid
forward until the butt plate of the weapon is secure.  Marking
the location of the butt assembly on the mount with a pencil
facilitates repositioning once the weapon is removed.  The loop
of the butt assembly that holds the heel of the stock is also
adjustable and should be marked to show a proper fit.

     When properly adjusted, the weapon should be worked back
and forth into the butt assembly so that it does not rattle when
the vehicle is in motion.  Once the butt assembly is properly
positioned and tightened, the weapon should be removed several
times to ensure proper assembly.

REMOVING THE WEAPON

     When the mount is installed on the vehicle's ceiling, a
half-moon detent or notch, approximately the diameter of a
12-gauge shotgun barrel, can be seen in the center of the barrel
assembly.  This detent cradles the weapons muzzle end.  If the
weapon is equipped with an elaborate, high-profile front sight
system, the mount may not accept it.

     Directly above the detent is a spring-loaded jaw that pivots  
on the rear side of the barrel assembly.  Therefore, the weapon 
must be lifted approximately 1 inch and pivoted forward for 
removal.  This mechanical design feature allows the driver to 
remove the weapon from the mount with one hand, regardless of 
whether the vehicle is in motion or stationary.                   

     To remove the weapon from the mount, the driver remains 
seated, with the left hand on the steering wheel and the right 
hand grasping the weapon close to the muzzle.  Then, with palm
up, the driver rests the thumb against the front edge of the
mount body.  By doing this, the weapon can be lifted up and
moved forward over the driver's head.  Once the muzzle end is
clear of the barrel assembly, the weapon is pivoted against the
butt assembly with the weapon's foregrip resting on the driver's
right forearm.  If the vehicle is in motion, the weapon can be
placed in a ready position, with the muzzle against the floor or
to the left in the driver's lap.

     The weapon can also be removed by the right front seat
passenger, if necessary.  In this position, the passenger uses
the left hand, palm up.  The weapon is again eased out of the
mount over the driver's head, pivoted from the butt assembly,
and rotated clockwise so that the muzzle end is never pointed at
any occupant of the vehicle.

SHOOTING POSITIONS

     Once the weapon is removed from the mount, a variety of
shooting positions can be used with the vehicle as cover.  For
example, while remaining seated, the driver can place the weapon
on the left shoulder and fire from a position above the top door
hinge.  Or, the driver can fire from the right shoulder with the
weapon placed as described above.  Using the right or left
shoulder position, the driver can also fire the weapon through
the open driver's door window.

     For front seat passengers, the weapon can be fired while in
the vehicle through the open window from either the left or
right shoulder, depending on the exact location of the target.
Like the driver, this shooter can also exit the vehicle, kneel,
and shoot right or left shoulder from a position above the door
hinge or through the window of the open door.

     Firing positions can also be taken behind either the front
or rear wheels of the vehicle.  However, the position taken
depends on the demands of the specific tactical situation.

SAFETY

     Although there are many tactical advantages to the
vehicular weapons mount, safety must always be the first
consideration.  Whenever the weapon is stored in the mount, it
can be loaded, but no round of ammunition should be in the
chamber.  Also, the weapon should be removed from the mount when
transporting a prisoner.  If the vehicle is left unattended, the
barrel assembly can be locked with a coinbox-type security key.

     The unit should not be mounted directly above the driver's
head or near the sun visors.  In the event of an accident, body
movement could cause injury to the occupants of the vehicle.

OPTIONS

     As an added feature, headliner fabric matching the interior
of the vehicle can be used to make a concealable weapons mount
cover.  As long as the cover can be fastened in such a manner
for easy detachment, it will not impair the quick removal of the
weapon from the mount, while providing added concealment.

CONCLUSION

     Providing concealment, security, and accessibility for
long-barrel weapons in unmarked vehicles is critical to the
well-being of law enforcement personnel.  The vehicular weapons
mount designed and tested by the FBI's Firearms Training Unit
ensures that these criteria are met, giving an advantage to
those deployed to potentially dangerous situations.

     To obtain additional information regarding this vehicular 
weapons mount, write the author at the FBI Academy, Quantico, 
Virginia, 22135, or call 1-703-640-1159. 
