      -:[First Class Presents]:-  
   --------------------------------
  [The Black Cauldron Ducumentation]
   --------------------------------
       [Written by: The Andrex]  
---------------------------------------
 Requirements: Apple ][e/][c with 128k
---------------------------------------

Loading Instructions
********************

1) Insert Disk 1, label side up, into
  drive 1.  Close the door to the disk
  drive.

2) Turn on power to the monitor, then 
  the computer.

3) If you are using a joystick, you
  will be prompted to center the joy-
  stick, then press either joystick 
  button.

4) When prompted, turn the disk over
  and press RETURN.

5) To bypass the banner page and cred-
  its, press any key.

   If you have trouble loading The
 Black Cauldron on an Apple ][e, first
 look at the serial number on the cen-
 ter back of your computer's mother-
 board.  If it ends in "A", you have an
 old motherboard, which you can get up-
 dated free of charge through any Auth-
 orized Apple dealer.  If you have the
 right motherboard, check your 80-col-
 umn card.  If there are two or three
 exposed lower prongs in the lower left
 corner, you are missing the jumper 
 that goes over these prongs.  Acquire
 one through your local Apple dealer.

  Because of random events and diff-
erent levels of victory, you can play 
the game many times over and never play
the same game twice!  If you are espec-
ially clever, and find every hidden nu-
ance in the game, you can score a maxi-
mum of 230 points in The Black Cauldron


COMMANDS FOR THE HERO
*********************

STATUS
------
  At the STATUS screen, you may see a
list of objects you are carrying, or 
perform any one of several game com-
mands:

HELP (see list of control keys for 
      available commands.)
SAVE the current game.
RESTORE a previously saved game.
RESTART the game.

  Press the black Apple key or press 
the upper joystick button to view the
STATUS screen.  Use the arrow keys or 
joystick to highlight a game command 
(HELP, SAVE, RESTORE, RESTART), press
black Apple or upper joystick button,
and follow the prompts to perform the 
command you have highlighted.  To go 
back to the game screen, press black
Apple key or the upper joystick button.

TO LOOK
-------

  In your explorations, you will often
want to look at an area or object on 
the screen:

       Look at the room.
       Look at the magic sword.

  Press 8 (or use the lower joystick
button) to LOOK.  What you actually see
will depend on where you are standing.

  To LOOK at something you are carrying
, go to the STATUS screen and highlight
the object; then pressing the clear 
Apple key (or lower joystick button).
The game screen will reappear, with a
closeup of the object you want to ex-
amine.

TO DO
-----

  You can DO any of a large variety of
activities:

       Open the door.
       Talk to Dallben.
       Get the apple.

  Press 6 (or use the lower joystick 
button) to DO something.  What you ac-
tually DO will depend on what has happ-
ened in the game, and where you are 
standing.  To open a door, you need to
stand next to it.  If you stand some-
where else, something quite different
may happen.

TO USE
------

  At some point in the game, you may 
USE each of the objects you pick up:

       Use the gruel to feed Hen Wen.
       Use the flask to get water.
       Use the key to unlock the door.

  Go to the STATUS screen, and high-
light the object you want to USE.  Af-
ter you return to the game screen, 
press 4 (or use the lower joystick but-
ton) to USE the currently selected ob-
ject.  The objext will remain selected
until you give it away, use it up, or
select another object.

CONTOL KEYS
***********

BLACK APPLE - display STATUS screen.
        TAB - display STATUS screen.
        ESC - PAUSE game.
          1 - toggle sound on/off.
          2 - display HELP screen.
          3 - SAVE current game.
          4 - USE object currently sel-
              ected on status screen.
          5 - RESTORE a previously 
              saved game.
          6 - DO something: talk, enter
              exit, get, etc...
          7 - RESTART game.
          8 - LOOK at an area.
CLEAR APPLE - LOOK at selected object
              from STATUS screen, or 
              display USE, DO, LOOK 
              menu.
     CTRL-Q - install and/or center joy
              stick during game.
     RETURN - RETURN to game from 
              STATUS screen.
BLACK APPLE - RETURN to game from
              STATUS screen.

  Use the arrow keys to move north,
south, east and west.
                      S
  <-- -->       ^     
   W   E       /!\    !
                !    \!/
                      v
                N 

  Use these keys to move diagonally:

    NW: ; & :
    NE: " & '
    SW: > & .
    SE: ? & /


SAVING YOUR GAME
****************

  Preparing a save game disk
 ----------------------------

  You will need to prepare your "save
game disk" only once.  From the game
screen, type INIT DISK and press the
RETURN key.  Following the prompts on
the screen to create a "save game disk"
If you have two drives, you may put
your "save game disk" in drive #2 and
leave it there as you play.

 Saving your game
------------------

  To save your game, press 3; or go to
the STATUS screen and yse the joystick
or arrow keys to highlight SAVE GAME,
then press Black apple key or the upper
joystick button.  Next, follow the 
prompts on the screen.  You will be 
asked to enter a letter to identify 
your game.  Type a different letter for
each game you want to save--if you type
a letter you have already used, the 
game previously saved under that letter
will be erased.

 Restoring your game
---------------------
  To resume a previously saved game, 
press 5; or go to the STATUS screen and
use the joystick or arrow to highlight
RESTORE GAME.  Following the prompts,
type the ltter for the saved game you
wish to restore.

---------------------------------------

thats it..
  
  Another rad First Class Crack!

Call: The Motherboard 10 megs
           [516] 333-7165